The Project Gutenberg eBook of The War History of the 1st/4th Battalion,
the Loyal North Lancashire Regiment, by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: The War History of the 1st/4th Battalion, the Loyal North
       Lancashire Regiment
       now the Loyal Regiment (North Lancashire), 1914-1918

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: May 18, 2021 [eBook #65369]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

Produced by: Brian Coe, Karin Spence and the Online Distributed
             Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This book was
             produced from images made available by the HathiTrust Digital
             Library.)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WAR HISTORY OF THE 1ST/4TH
BATTALION, THE LOYAL NORTH LANCASHIRE REGIMENT ***




                            THE WAR HISTORY OF
                            THE 1ST/4TH BATTALION
                            THE LOYAL NORTH
                            LANCASHIRE REGIMENT

  [Illustration: THE COLOURS]




                                  THE
                              WAR HISTORY
                                OF THE

                   1st/4th Battalion The Loyal North
                         Lancashire Regiment,

                        _now The Loyal Regiment
                         (North Lancashire)_.

                               1914-1918

    “_The Lancashire foot were as stout men as were in the world and
    as brave plunderers as ever went to a field...._

    “_It was to admiration to see what a spirit of courage and
    resolution there was amongst us, and how God hid us from the fears
    and dangers we were exposed to._”

           CAPTAIN HODGSON, WRITING IN 1648, ON THE BATTLE OF PRESTON.


                              [COPYRIGHT]


                                 1921
    Printed by GEO. TOULMIN & SONS, LTD., Guardian Works, Preston.
             Published by the BATTALION HISTORY COMMITTEE.

  [Illustration:

    _Photo: A. Winter, Preston._

  LIEUTENANT-COLONEL RALPH HINDLE, D.S.O.

  He commanded the Battalion from February, 1915, till wounded in action
  at Festubert, and again from August, 1915, till killed in action at
  Vaucellette Farm, on 30th November, 1917.

   “_What do these fellows mean by saying, ‘I’ve done my
   bit’? What is their ‘bit’? I don’t consider I’ve done mine
   yet._”--Lieutenant-Colonel Hindle in 1917.]




                              Dedication.


                                  To

                    The Main Body of our Comrades,
                  who have gone forward in triumph to
                           the Unknown Land,

                                  We,

                            The Rear Party,
                left behind to clean up and hand over,
                          Dedicate this book.




                                PREFACE


The purpose of this book is to supply to the people of Preston and
district, for the first time, a complete and authentic record of the
adventures of their original local Territorial Infantry Battalion
during the Great War, such a record being a chapter of local history
which must sooner or later be written; to put into the hands of the
relatives and friends of those who have gloriously fallen the story
of the unit with which they served faithful unto death, with its
accompanying tribute from their surviving comrades; to supply to the
latter ... maimed or whole a book which they may hand down to posterity
to speak of their service; and last, but not least, to speak to those
who shall succeed to our traditions, of Comradeship, Cheerfulness,
Endurance, Devotion to Duty, and all the virtues which go to make up
“the Spirit of the Regiment.”

The delay in publication has been unavoidable, and even now the book is
not as complete as its compilers would wish; in particular, it is not
possible to give the names of casualties as they occurred, except in
the case of Officers; both Company and Battalion records have had to be
destroyed again and again, and there is little material left to work on
except the War Diary and individual diaries.

The book is a live product. Every line of it is either written by
those who were actually with the Battalion during the period of which
they write, or is condensed from the War Diary. It would have been far
easier, and, from a literary point of view, more satisfactory, to have
handed over the documents to a professional Historian to write up, but
it was felt that the vivid descriptions of eyewitnesses, even though
lacking in style, were preferable to any such compilation.




                               CONTENTS


    Dedication
    Preface                                                        Page
    Chapter  I.--Early History and Training in England                1

            II.--Early Days and the Battle of Festubert               5

           III.--Trench Warfare                                      22

            IV.--The Somme Battles                                   31

             V.--Trench Warfare in the Salient                       40

            VI.--The Third Battle of Ypres                           61

           VII.--Reorganisation and the Battle of the Menin Road     79

          VIII.--Cambrai                                             95

            IX.--Givenchy Period                                    106

             X.--The Advance                                        126

            XI.--After the Armistice                                131

    Appendix A.--The Honours List                                   137

             B.--The Casualty List                                  141




                             ILLUSTRATIONS


    Frontispiece: The Colours

    Portrait of Lieutenant-Colonel Ralph Hindle, D.S.O.
                                                      Facing Dedication

    Reduced Facsimile of the Roll of Volunteers for Service
       Abroad                                         Facing Chapter I.

    Group of Officers--Bedford, 1915                      Facing Page 4

    Photograph--Meteren, 1915                                  "      7

    Battalion about to Parade for Trenches, 1916               "     31

    Christmas Card, 1916                                       "     50

    Aeroplane Photograph of Trench Lines in Salient            "     57

    Aeroplane Oblique Photograph of Trenches in Salient        "     58

    Aeroplane Oblique Photograph, showing Objectives for Third
    Battle of Ypres                                            "     61

    Panorama Photograph from Pond Farm                         "     81

    Aeroplane Photograph of D.13.c.                            "     82

    Aeroplane Oblique Photograph of Objectives--Menin Road
       Battle                                                  "     85

    Group of W.O.’s and N.C.O.’s--Delettes, 1918               "    106

    Remnant of Givenchy Keep, 1920                            Page  116

    The Colours Marching Past--Brussels                 Facing Page 131

    Site of the Battalion Memorial                             Page 132

    Divisional Cocarde                                           "  133


                                 MAPS

    Map No. 1--Festubert                                 Facing Page 12

    Map of Battle of Festubert (Sketch Map)                   "      15

    Map of Battle of Festubert (7 p.m.)                        Page  16

    Map of Battle of Guillemont                                  "   34

    Map of Battle of Delville Wood                               "   37

    Map of Battle of Guedecourt                                  "   38

    Map No. 2--Ypres Salient                             Facing Page 40

    Map of the Third Battle of Ypres, showing Objectives        Page 63

    Map No. 3--Menin Road Battle                         Facing Page 83

    Map No. 4--Gillemont Farm Sector                          "      96

    Map No. 5--Vaucellette Farm Area                          "     100

    Map No. 6--Givenchy                                       "     108

    Facsimile of German Map, showing Plan of Attack, Captured
    April 9th, 1918                                           "     110




   A Reduced Facsimile of the Roll of Volunteers for
   Service Abroad signed in the Public Hall, on 8th August,
   1914

  [Illustration: A Reduced Facsimile of the Roll of Volunteers for
  Service Abroad signed in the Public Hall, on 8th August, 1914.

      A Company       B Company      C Company

      D Company      E Company      F Company

      G Company      H Company
  ]




                              CHAPTER I.

                Early History and Training in England.


The Loyal North Lancashire Regiment has a peculiar history, being
descended from the old 47th, the Lanarkshire[A] Regiment, and the 81st,
the Loyal Lincoln Volunteers.

In 1881, when these two Regiments were at their Depot at Preston, it
was found convenient to amalgamate them, and they became the 1st and
2nd Battalions of the North Lancashire Regiment. The Lincolnshire men
were not pleased at having to drop the epithet “Loyal” (conferred on
them[B] in memory of an occasion during the Peninsular War when, on
volunteers being told to step one pace forward, the entire Battalion
moved forward one pace), and they placed their views before the War
Office, with the result that the new formation was allowed to retain
the epithet, and it became the Loyal North Lancashire Regiment.
This little outline of its history explains why the 1st Battalion’s
March-past is “My love is like a red, red rose,” generally known as the
“Red Rose,” and the 2nd Battalion’s “The Lincolnshire Poacher.”

A Volunteer Rifle Corps was formed in Preston in 1859 as a
consequence of the talked-of possibilities of a French invasion.
This Corps continued in existence as a Volunteer Corps until the
territorialisation of Regiments about the year 1878, when it became a
Volunteer Battalion of the Loyal North Lancashire Regiment; later, on
the formation of the Territorial Force it became the 4th (T.) Battalion
of the same Regiment.

This Territorial Battalion succeeded to the traditions of the
amalgamated units, and strove as best it might to emulate its Regular
Battalions, but the Territorial scheme did not produce the full
complement of officers and men, and it should be realised that those
who served in it prior to the war did so in the face of a certain
amount of ridicule, gave up nearly the whole of their spare time to
camps and drills, and in most cases were seriously out of pocket over
the whole business.

With the exception of a Company which was sent to South Africa to
reinforce the Regular Battalion, the unit had not seen active service
prior to August, 1914, but those who then belonged to it were keen, and
had, in the face of discouragements, done their level best to master
their job.

The beginning of August, 1914, found the Battalion, under strength in
officers and men, in camp at Kirkby Lonsdale. When war was declared
on the 4th of August, and the Territorial Force was embodied, the 4th
were hurriedly recalled, and took up their quarters in the Public Hall,
Preston. Within two or three days they had recruited to strength in all
ranks, and had volunteered, practically to a man, for service abroad.
Photographs of the original roll signed on that occasion will be found
immediately preceding Chapter I.

That first fortnight in the Public Hall will never be forgotten by
any of those who went through it. The Companies lived, ate, and slept
on the floor, or on the benches in the gallery; the officers slept on
the floor of one of the crush-rooms, and the whole business was a bit
of a nightmare, but we were firmly under the impression at that time
that any day might bring orders to go abroad, and we were kept fully
equipped and issued with ammunition according to the mobilisation scale
then in force.

On the 8th August, the Battalion paraded in the Market Square, Preston,
and the colours were handed over to the Mayor for safe custody, no one
at that time foreseeing that they would remain there for just on five
years. A photograph of the colours appears as a frontispiece to this
book: in the fulness of time, no doubt, the battle honours earned by
the Battalion in the Great War will be embroidered upon them.

On the 22nd August, we moved down to Swindon, where the Battalion
remained for nearly three months, billeted in schools, training, and
generally improving discipline, but it was very difficult to get much
real work done, as detachments were sent off to guard the main line
of the Great Western Railway. These detachments, on the whole, had a
pretty good time, as they were stationed at various places along the
Thames Valley and the local people took a great interest in them, and
were most hospitable. They learnt a good deal, especially in getting
used to night sentry work, but no one was sorry when in November they
were recalled and the Battalion moved as a whole to Sevenoaks.

Here we were allotted good training grounds and serious training was
possible. Though the nature of the billets, mostly empty houses, threw
us much on our own resources, it had the advantage that we began to
learn to make ourselves comfortable under any circumstances.

We spent Christmas here, and had a very elaborate Christmas dinner,
followed by a really good concert, in a large marquee provided by the
generosity of one of the inhabitants. We found many hospitable folk at
Sevenoaks, and made many friends.

The two King’s Own Battalions and the 5th Battalion of the Loyal North
Lancashire Regiment were also billeted at the same place, and there
was a good deal of unavoidable overcrowding. Up to this time we had
been the only 4th Battalion, but in November, 1914, an order was issued
that 2nd Line Territorial Battalions should be formed, for Home Service
only, to find drafts for the 1st Line Battalions, and we took the title
1/4th, to distinguish ourselves from the 2/4th, then in process of
formation at Blackpool. The latter was later on--early in 1916--sent
overseas, and served in France and Belgium in the 57th Division.

About February, 1915, the 1/4th, which had previously been worked on
the eight-company organisation, with a Captain, two Subalterns, and a
Colour-Sergeant to each Company, was reorganised in accordance with a
War Office Order on the four company system. This system had been in
operation in the Regular Army for some time prior to the war; why it
had not previously been applied to the Territorial Force we never knew,
and only surmised that it had been on its trial until the change was
actually made.

February, 1915, will always be regarded as the turning point
in our history. Major Hindle, then Junior Major, was promoted
Lieutenant-Colonel and given command of the unit. A severe process of
weeding out started, coupled with vigorous inoculation and vaccination,
and we commenced to train in accordance with the new War Office
syllabus of training. We trained very hard, but everybody was becoming
restive. It is not too much to say that we had daily been expecting to
be sent abroad ever since the previous August, and by this time we were
beginning to think that we should never go. In consequence there was
much muttering, which was not allayed when we saw the 1/5th Loyal North
Lancashires hand in their blankets one morning, and parade for France.

In March, 1915, we were suddenly moved to Oxted, where we were
billeted in empty houses. There we began to dig, and completed, to
the satisfaction of those who were in charge, a section of the London
Defences running over the Downs. This was excellent experience, as
there was every kind of soil to be contended with--clay, chalk, sand,
and a sort of conglomerate, composed of what seemed to be melted
flints, which blunted any pick in about five minutes. Here we first
came into contact with elements of Kitchener’s Army, which were engaged
on similar work.

In April, 1915, it was suddenly made known that at last we really were
going to France, and we were moved to Bedford, where we joined the 51st
Highland Division. The ten days at Bedford were spent in completely
re-equipping the Battalion and transport, and in bayonet fighting and
route marching, our last route march before crossing to France being
one of 18 miles in full pack.

The Lancashire men and the Highlanders fought like anything when they
first met, and a keen rivalry sprang up between them, which only became
friendly when one evening a fight took place between one of our fellows
and one of the Highlanders. It was reported amongst us that our man
had won. Probably a similar report was current amongst the Highlanders
with regard to their champion! Whatever the truth was, from that day we
settled down together and became the best of friends.

It has been impossible to devote very much space to these early days
in England. Everyone was as keen as mustard, and we had the advantage
of having, besides our Regular Adjutant Captain Norman (Royal Welsh
Fusiliers), and Sergeant-Major Farnworth (of the 1st Battalion), a
number of senior Officers who had made soldiering their hobby for
years and passed the examinations necessary to attain their rank. The
Warrant Officers and many of the Non-Commissioned Officers were also
thoroughly trained. The disadvantages under which we laboured were
that, being a Territorial unit, our equipment had not been up to date,
and we were not, at first at any rate, taken in hand and pushed on as
the newly-formed Kitchener’s Army were; but there is no doubt that
at Bedford, when at last we were under orders for overseas, we held
our heads high, and in all the glory of a new issue of equipment and
clothes were on the whole a pretty smart and likely looking lot. It
is most unfortunate that the only photographs taken of Companies at
Bedford are not now available, the films having been destroyed by fire.
Two Officers and a number of men had been left at Oxted, and one can
never forget the pitiful disappointment shown on their faces as we
marched away, leaving them behind. Some of them afterwards came to us
as reinforcements.

  [Illustration:

      _Elliott & Fry._

  OFFICERS GROUP.

  Bedford, 1915.]




                              CHAPTER II.

                Early Days and the Battle of Festubert.


On the 2nd of May, 1915, Major Foley, Second Lieutenant Harris
(Transport Officer), the Machine Gun Officer, and 104 other ranks and
the whole of the Regimental Transport, entrained at BALLAST PIT SIDING,
BEDFORD, at one o’clock in the morning, arriving at SOUTHAMPTON at 6 40
a.m., where they embarked on s.s. “ROSSETTI” and sailed at 4 30 p.m.,
arriving at HAVRE at 3 a.m. on the 3rd.

On the evening of that day, the rest of the Battalion entrained at
BALLAST PIT SIDING in two trains, and travelled down to FOLKESTONE,
where they arrived about midnight, and marched straight down on to the
boat, s.s. “ONWARD,” which cast off at 1 30 a.m.

At last we were really on our way, after all the delays and waitings
we _were_ going overseas like the rest! And it had all been done so
quickly that only now, as we stood on the darkened boat and watched the
lights of England receding, did we begin to realise what it meant--this
stealthy journey of nearly a thousand souls across the Channel, which
many of us had never seen before, and which many were never to see
again.

The Adjutant’s diary gives our strength (apart from the Advance Party)
as follows:--

    Lieut.-Colonel R. Hindle.

    Captain and Adjutant C. C. Norman (R. Welsh Fusiliers.)

    Captains Nickson, Booth, Hibbert, Peak, Whitfield, Crump, H. Parker,
       Widdows.

    Lieutenants Ord (Signalling Officer), Smith, Rennard, Brindle, Moore,
       Gregson, Duckworth.

    Second Lieutenants Houghton, Davies, Lindsay, Rogerson, P. Parker,
       Bryce-Smith, Craven.

    Lieutenant and Quartermaster F. W. Baker.

    Captain Derham (R.A.M.C.).

    Rev. Powell, C. of E. Chaplain.

    And 895 W.O.’s, N.C.O.’s, and Men.

The total strength of the Battalion on this date was (including
attached) 31 Officers and 1,003 other Ranks.

No smoking or talking was allowed on deck during the passage, which
was calm and without incident, and the boat drew alongside at BOULOGNE
about 3 a.m., where we at once disembarked and marched about two miles
to a canvas rest camp at OSTROHOVE. How strange everything looked in
the early morning light, as we swung along against our instincts on
the _right-hand_ side of the pavé road, the French signs with which we
grew so familiar later on, the grilles in the front doors, the smells!

On arrival at the camp we were soon told off to our tents, where we
slept till eight, when we had breakfast. After breakfast most of us
sent off our first Field Postcards to the folks at home, and cleaned
up. We stayed in camp all day, resting and sunning ourselves, parading
again at 6 30 p.m., when we marched to PONT DE BRIQUES Station, where
we formed up in groups of 40 and waited for the train, which soon
arrived from HAVRE with the Transport. Cattle trucks! However, we
entrained, about 40 to a truck, and presently jolted off; we spent a
very uncomfortable night!

On 5th May, about 2 30 a.m., we arrived at BERGUETTE, where we
detrained and at 4 a.m. started to march to LILETTE, led by a “guide”
who took us about two miles out of our way--a serious matter, on empty
stomachs, to us who were still fresh from “the fleshpots of Egypt”;
however, we got there, and went into billets of sorts, many preferring
to sleep in the open, so villainously dirty were some of the outhouses.
Here we found the 1/8th King’s Liverpools, the 1/4th King’s Own and
Brigade Headquarters being at neighbouring places. All day and all
night an almost continuous stream of motor vehicles went through,
mostly laden with French troops in their picturesque blue and red.
Battalion Headquarters was “chez M. Rousseau,” and the Officers’ Mess
in a small estaminet. As we rested that day, we heard the distant guns
for the first time, booming intermittently the whole day through.

On the 6th, about 7 15 p.m., we received orders to move, and marched
out at 8 p.m. to LILLERS, where we joined the rear of the Brigade at
2 47 p.m. Here began the worst march that any of us remember, over
strange uneven roads, in pitch darkness. To us, marching in rear of
the whole Brigade, it seemed interminable; halts were irregular, and
by the time “ten minutes’ halt” came along to us it was time to move
again, and it was impossible to maintain a steady pace. Added to this
someone had seen fit to billet from the front of the column instead of
the rear, which held us up at each billeting village and prolonged the
march considerably. The last mile nearly finished us, but we stumbled
into CALONNE-SUR-LE-LYS at 4 a.m.--dead beat--and slept it off.

We had a pretty easy time for the next few days, as, beyond being
required to be ready to move at an hour’s notice, we were left alone.
The weather was fine, and many of us bivouacked; we did a little
training, and tried to teach the local people a little sanitation, a
word which apparently did not exist in their language. We, on the other
hand, learnt that faggots and soil had a market value; one Company,
taking soil from a heap in a field, were pounced on by the owner for
taking “ma bonne terre” to cover someone else’s smelly midden, and he
was quite rude about it. The Officers’ Mess was in a private house on
the main street; one night when an al fresco concert was in progress
to the great delight of the troops, a man passing on the road enquired
what was going on, and received the laconic reply, “Officers’ rum
issue!”

  [Illustration: METEREN, 1915.]

On the 8th we were visited by Sir Douglas Haig and the Divisional
Commander.

The gunfire about eight or nine miles away increased on the 9th to what
must have been a very heavy bombardment--no doubt the second Battle of
LA BASSEE.

On the 11th blankets and Officers’ kits were allowed to be removed from
the waggons on which they had hitherto been loaded, and the state of
readiness was relaxed. Respirators for poisonous gas (the old gauze and
wadding affairs) were issued. On the 13th there was a thunderstorm,
accompanied by torrential rain, which did not add to the comfort of the
campers.

Just after midnight on the 14th, orders to move arrived, and after
breakfast we fell in and moved to the starting point by CALONNE CHURCH,
whence we marched as a Brigade to METEREN. We arrived there at 2 p.m.,
and got into billets about 3, mostly on the east and north-east sides
of the town, the Mess as usual in an estaminet, whose landlord thought
fit to start emptying his midden soon after we arrived, causing one man
to say to another, who seemed in low spirits, “What’s up, Tommy? Avez
vous mal de midden?”

The country was different from CALONNE, where the ground was flat and
intersected by ditches full of frogs which croaked all night; here it
was undulating, and windmills and hop fields became features. On the
south side of the town were a number of graves of Officers and Men who
had fallen in the fighting there on 15th October, mostly Royal Warwicks
and King’s Own--it was said that the Huns had mounted machine guns on
the tower of the church, which commands the country to the south and
west, and had simply mown them down. How difficult we found it then to
realise the story, and how peaceful the little town seemed to us. The
Adjutant took the opportunity of teaching the Officers a little field
sketching--a branch of our training which had hitherto been crowded
out. Courses in those days were few and far between, and though we had
learnt in the Regiment many things of which some of the systematically
trained Officers of later days were conspicuously ignorant, there were
gaps in our knowledge.

Sunday was fine and hot, and all denominations had Church Parades.
On Monday the Ninth Division marched through--what a fine lot they
looked, and how we envied them “their cookers.” Why hadn’t we got
cookers? And the old galling comparisons between the treatment of the
Territorial Force and Kitchener’s Army were rubbed in once more. It is
all dead now, but we had something to grouse at. On Tuesday, the 18th,
we paraded at 8 p.m. for a night march, through VIEUX BERQUIN and NEUF
BERQUIN to LA GORGUE, a suburb of ESTAIRES, where we arrived about 4
a.m. Not for months afterwards did most of us learn that we, the 51st
Division, had been moved up by General French to be in reserve for the
Second Battle of LA BASSEE.

The town was full of troops. Our men were billeted in breweries and
factories; B and A Companies were in a shell-riddled Girls’ School;
the Officers had difficulty in finding even a floor to sleep on, but
at last most of them gravitated to one estaminet, where they fed on
what they could get, and slept. An unforgettable incident rises to
the mind. Lieutenant----, having disposed himself for slumber on three
chairs and fallen asleep, tried to turn over and so rolled off--in one
piece--on to the floor, where he lay immovable, only remarking, in
injured tones: “I’m fed up with this ---- War!”

On the 19th, the 2/5th Lancashire Fusiliers left us and went to ST.
OMER, and 18 of our men were sent to the Tunnelling Company R.E.; this
is mentioned because it was our first separation--we had been together,
in the same sections even, with practically no change for months.

On the 20th we marched to billets in farms on the east side of LOCON;
when we got there we found them occupied by a Battalion of the
Grenadier Guards, who had been in action the night before and lost
their Colonel, Sergt.-Major, and 67 other Ranks, so we formed up in
a field opposite a large 18th century farm with a moat round it and
stayed there all day; in the evening the Guards moved out and marched
off with that inimitable swing of theirs, and we took over their
billets--untouched farms within three miles of the line. Here we were
close to the lair of a 9in. Howitzer--the only one on that front, it
was said--which had been shelling the Hun all day.

The next day we set to work with zeal to clean up and put the
sanitation right--covering middens to prevent flies breeding, building
incinerators, and fixing up a water supply; we rather specialised in
sanitation even in those days, when most people seemed rather to scoff
at it. Late at night the 5th Gordons arrived and bivouacked in the
field opposite.

On the 23rd, a very hot day, sanitary work continued, and surveys
of the billeting area were carried out by Officers, and afterwards
combined into a composite map; the next day Second Lieutenant
Sutherland, of the 2nd Leicesters, two N.C.O.’s, and 11 men reported,
to instruct us in trench work--needless to say we were keen for
anything they could teach us, as we were eagerly looking forward to our
first tour in the line. Yes, Reader, you may think this is a figure of
speech, but it is not--we really were, and we sharpened our bayonets
with zest on the old lady’s grindstone, and thought she must be a
German spy because she tried to stop us!

All the same, we expected to stay where we were for a few weeks, and
were a bit surprised to learn, after a lecture on trench work by
Captain Burton, 39th Gharwalis (we were in the Indian Corps), that
we were to go into the line on the 25th. We assembled on the road by
Battalion Headquarters at 7 p.m. and marched to a Cemetery, where we
were met by an Officer of the 1/7th Black Watch. He reported that the
trenches we were to occupy were being shelled by the enemy, so we
halted till 10 p.m., when we moved forward by platoons at 100 yards’
distance.

It is quite impossible to try to convey in print the impression of
one’s first march up to the line: one remembers the dark, strange road,
broken trees, loose telephone wires, a long halt in a battered village,
then on through interminable miles of breastworks manned by Canadians,
crawling cautiously along in single file and breathless silence--then
a halt, and platoons are sent off down various alleys, to find at the
end a trench full of Scotsmen anxiously awaiting relief. The right of
the Battalion rested on the QUINQUE RUE, the left on the road from
RUE DE L’EPINETTE to FERME COUR D’AVOUE; A and D Companies and Machine
Gun Section occupied the front line, No. 2 platoon having an advanced
post about 200 yards in front of the main line; C was in support and
B in reserve. The fire trench had only recently been built, and the
forward bit had 18in. of water in it; no wire had been put up. The
support trench was an old German trench about 300 yards to the left
rear of the fire trench, while the reserve trench was again 200 yards
behind the latter. The parapets were revetted with, and in some cases
entirely built of, sandbags; dugouts--very sketchy--were built in the
parados! The trenches were nowhere more than two feet deep, the rest of
the cover being above ground; there were narrow communication trenches.
Every house in the neighbourhood was in utter ruin, and the ground
was a mass of shell holes. Equipment, rifles, ammunition, clothing,
tins, both our own and enemy, were strewn everywhere, and dozens of
bodies--chiefly of Scots Guards and Germans--lay about as they had
fallen in the May Battle of Festubert; the stench was awful. Some
old German trenches, not occupied by us, were interesting as showing
the elaborate way they had dug themselves in. One dugout was a room
about 15ft. square, with doors and a window, lined throughout with
wood planking covered with cloth, and furnished with leather-covered
chairs and a table; in one a quantity of feminine underclothing was
found--what it was doing there could only be guessed.

Most of the above description is taken from the Adjutant’s journal,
written at the time; all we saw that night was mud and sandbags. The
Platoon which took over the forward trench had to wait for the Scots to
climb out at the back, and then stepped down about two feet and found
themselves in a good foot of muddy water. There was nothing for it but
to wait till dawn; when it came we found ourselves in a shallow ditch,
with only two rows of sandbags in front. Immediately to our front was
a huge pile of black, red, and yellow sandbags, where the Germans had
blocked and strengthened an old communication trench leading into our
lines; their main line was further off--from 200 to 400 yards; behind
us and in front were the dead bodies, also in our own parapet and under
the duckboards of the communication trench, which was soon dubbed
“Bluebottle Alley,” for as soon as the sun rose clouds of the loathsome
insects filled the air and buzzed round our heads. To our front we
could see in the distance the spire of VIOLAINES Church, and on our
right was a new parapet, very high and thick, surrounding CANADIAN
ORCHARD. We were puzzled and annoyed for some days by sniping from that
direction, till one early morning we saw a Hun crawling from under that
same parapet towards his own lines, but a rifle shot fired from a rifle
which had belonged to one of the Scots Guards settled his hash and
avenged the late owner of the rifle.

On the 26th we were shelled intermittently all day, and two men were
wounded, our first casualties; in the evening two platoons were sent
out and extended from the right of No. 2 Platoon at P 11 and started
a trench to connect up with the Canadians. On the 27th we were again
shelled intermittently, but no appreciable damage was done and we
improved our positions greatly. We did not realise then that we had
been put in to finish the consolidation of newly-taken ground--a
pretty stiff beginning for raw troops. The night was exceptionally
quiet--there was less shelling than usual and very little sniping;
during the morning our fire trenches were shelled somewhat severely
with shrapnel, and again in the afternoon, six men being wounded.
As soon as it got dark, working parties went out to get on with the
new trench to the right of P 11; the existing forward trench was
strengthened and the R.E. put a footbridge across the ditch on our
right front; it was very dark and there were no interruptions.

The next day we lost two men wounded by shell fire, which was
pretty heavy. A working party of 200, with a covering party under
Lieutenant Brindle, started a new trench from the new bridge towards
the Canadians, and did good work in spite of bursts of shrapnel at
intervals; during the night bearings were taken on gun flashes, and we
located the enemy battery which was troubling us.

On the 30th the enemy fire--both shrapnel and H.E. (known in those
days as “Jack Johnsons” or “Coalboxes”)--was heavier than usual; two
years later such activity would have provoked a perfect hurricane of
retaliation from our own guns, but in 1915 our gunners had nothing to
throw away and no retaliation could be had. That night the working
parties continued their work, and our guns at 12 15 a.m. and 2 15 a.m.
fired a few shells. The enemy retorted with vigour, wounding Second
Lieutenant Bryce-Smith and five men and killing one. The working
parties were brought in at 1 a.m. The enemy fire died down about 3 30
a.m., but burst out afresh at 11 a.m., being directed chiefly on our
fire trenches, which were damaged in several places.

On 1st June we carried out the usual programme, and were shelled fairly
heavily during the afternoon; in these early days we had three or six
men in every bay of the trench, and the wonder is that our casualties
were not much greater than they were. On the 2nd we were relieved by
58th Vaughan’s Rifles, and marched back to billets at CORNET MALO, half
a mile north-west of LOCON CHURCH. We went out by companies, and the
leading men set off at about four miles an hour, with the result that
those at the back of the long single file were running and stumbling
and out of breath, and it was great good luck that we all reached
the rendezvous; but we did, and after a short rest, tramped off by
Companies to our billets, which we reached about 4 a.m. As each Company
wheeled into its own farmyard a wild cheer went up, for there were our
C.Q.M.S. and cooks, a brand new field cooker, like the ones we had seen
and envied with the 9th Division, and, best of all, a meal--piping hot
and ready. It took about one minute to get the Company formed in close
column, arms piled, packs off and neatly dressed, and coffee served out.

We rested all day, but in the evening moved to fresh billets between
CALONNE and ROBECQ via the LA BASSEE CANAL. Lieutenant Gregson and 30
other ranks went to the new Grenadier Company, and Lieutenant Smith
and four to the Trench Mortar class. Two days later, back we went to
our old billets at CORNET MALO! That was a horrid march. Starting at
7 p.m., we marched 12 miles as ordered, but on arrival no one knew
anything about us, and on enquiring at Brigade Headquarters it was
discovered that a counter-order had been issued but had never reached
us, so we had to turn about and retrace our steps to CORNET MALO,
arriving at midnight. It was during this counter-march that we passed
a Battalion of Highlanders, and one of them shouted: “What Battalion’s
that?” Quick as thought came the answer in a tone of pitying contempt:
“Battalion! This isn’t a Battalion; it’s a ---- walking club!” Another
Scots wit asked: “What are you chaps doing? Marching?” and got prompt
answer: “Marching! No; we’re resting!”--as indeed we were, technically.

On the 7th Second Lieutenant Lindsay went to hospital with flu’; it
was a sultry day and bathing was fashionable, both in the Canal and
the clear streams, also the following day, till a thunderstorm with
torrents of rain put a stop to it. Captain Parker also went to hospital
about this time.

On 9th June we moved up to the trenches along the RUE DE BOIS, RUE
DE L’EPINETTE, through FESTUBERT VILLAGE and down LE QUINQUE RUE for
about 800 yards, and relieved the 1/7th Black Watch. FESTUBERT was
the most badly-smashed village we had yet seen--there were remnants
of barricades still standing in the streets--most of the houses were
heavily sandbagged, and some had barbed wire round them. There was a
house at the entrance to the village with all the front blown in and
the furniture of the upper bedrooms hanging shakily--half in, half out.
Where the Church had been, now only recognisable by the Crucifix which
still stood unharmed, we turned to the left. (This description and the
pages which follow were written by the late Captain Lindsay at the
time, and have been inserted practically as he wrote them.)

THURSDAY, June 10th, 1915.

The day passed away very quietly; but there were two or three very
heavy thunderstorms with torrential rains which rapidly converted the
trenches--the communication trenches in particular--into quagmires.
These communication trenches became very dirty, in no place being less
than boot-deep and in many places thigh-deep in a pestilent liquid
mud. The boards placed at the bottom of the trench were quite covered
over, and, being extremely slippery, were mainly useful in leading the
way to the deeper, wetter part of the trenches! Working parties at
night in heavy rain had very great difficulty in making progress. The
night was very dark, and the men were loaded with spades and hurdles
and sandbags. Only a section of the working party under the command of
Captain Crump managed to get through to the fire trench, and took three
hours to do it--until midnight--distance not quite a mile! Working
parties were under control of Engineers.

Lieutenant Hoit was admitted to hospital suffering from rheumatism.
Second Lieutenant Rawsthorn, Reserve Machine Gun Officer, took over the
Machine Guns.

FRIDAY, June 11th, 1915.

Second Lieutenant Lindsay rejoined the Battalion.

The morning was finer, but the trenches were still very muddy. Three
working parties were sent out in the morning to work in the open
between the reserve and the support lines in the making of bridges
across the ditches and of tracks through the long grass, of ramps in
the trenches to facilitate climbing the parapet, and in clearing up the
old German trench which lay in that area. The Germans shelled this old
trench of theirs regularly, though it was not occupied.

The Battalion was relieved unexpectedly by the 1/7th Black Watch.
Relief was completed by 10 45 p.m., and the Battalion marched back
along the Canal to billets near LE CORNET MALO, in the wood to the
south of that place. The march was a tiring one, but the men lasted out
well, and billets were reached about 5 a.m.

SATURDAY, June 12th, 1915.

The day was passed in resting and cleaning up.

SUNDAY, June 13th, 1915.

Orders were received to return to the trenches we had left on Friday
night, and relieve the Battalions which had relieved the 1/8th K.L.
Irish and ourselves then. Though no order had been issued, we all knew
that the Battalion was going up for an attack, and in anticipation of
this the Officers, or as many as cared to do so, drew men’s uniforms
from the Quartermaster’s Stores. Lieutenant Moore, hearing in hospital
word of this impending attack, rejoined us. The Battalion marched off
at 6 p.m., and relief was completed in the trenches about 1 a.m. This
time we took over the fire and support trenches from the 1/6th Black
Watch. We found the trenches very much drier than when we left them.
There was some shelling at the time of relief. The dispositions of the
Battalion (646 strong) were: B and C Companies in fire trenches, D
Company in support, A Company in reserve.

Second Lieutenant Houghton and one man were wounded going up.

It is a queer sensation going up to one’s first battle. The bracing
of the nerves to face the unknown--it is the essence of religion,
voluntary self-sacrifice for a cause, made possible only by faith, and
calling for the strongest effort of will to control the nerves. Happy
the man who is not gifted with a vivid imagination--who, like Kipling’s
oxen, can plod steadily along, living in the present--blind to the
future. Those who fall do so at the moment of their highest endeavour;
had they lived they had probably never risen so high again. Surely to
them, if to anyone, is granted the peace which passeth understanding.

MONDAY, June 14th, 1915.

The Battalion had been warned for an attack, and operation orders
issued from the Brigade in the morning made this clear. With the object
of gaining ground in the direction of RUE D’OUVERT, the Fourth Corps
was to attack the German positions in the north. The 51st Division, the
7th Division, and the Canadian Division were to attack simultaneously.

  [Illustration: Map No. 1

  FESTUBERT]

The 51st Division detailed the 154th Infantry Brigade, and the 154th
Infantry Brigade the 1/4th Loyal North Lancashire Regiment (with 10
bombers) on the right, and the 1/6th Scottish Rifles (with 10 bombers),
on the left, as assaulting troops. Besides these there were:--

      I.  2 Officers, 7 N.C.O.’s, and 36 men from Grenadier Company.
     II.  12 bayonet men from 1/4th North Lancashires.
          16 bayonet men from 1/6th Scottish Rifles.
    III.  2  N.C.O.’s, 12 men of 1/4th North Lancashires, Blocking
             parties.
          1  N.C.O., 6 men of 1/6th Scottish Rifles.
     IV.  1  N.C.O., 6 men of 1/4th North Lancashires, Carrying
             parties.
          1  N.C.O., 6 men of 1/6th  Scottish Rifles.
      V.  1 Sections as escort from the 1/4th North Lancashires.

    (These North Lancashire details were found by D Company.)

The supporting Battalion was the 1/4th Royal Lancaster Regiment, less
two platoons, whilst the 1/8th Liverpool Regiment was held in Brigade
Reserve.

There was also a Trench Mortar detachment with two guns of the old
“Archibald” type, under the command of Lieutenant Smith.

A working party of two platoons from the 1/4th Royal Lancaster Regiment
was detailed to accompany one Section of the 2/2nd Highland Field
Company R.E.

The attack by the Brigade was towards the houses on the road behind the
German salient. At these houses a junction would be effected, if the
attack was successful, with the 7th Division. The two attacks converged
on this point. We were to obtain flanking fire from the rifles and
machine guns of the 152nd Brigade in the trenches to our left. They in
turn were to advance on the flank when we had consolidated our position.

The whole attack was timed for 6 p.m. on the 15th June, and was to be
preceded by a 48 hours’ bombardment.

These, in brief, were the operation orders. We had been warned to
show no signs of activity during this preliminary bombardment, which
began about dawn, and was devoted chiefly to cutting the enemy’s
barbed wire. Field guns bombarded this, whilst the heavier guns played
on the enemy’s trenches, and the heaviest on the houses behind. The
bombardment was not confined to our front, but extended all along the
ridge to the south towards VIOLAINES. This village lay over the ridge,
and only the church spire could be seen.

From the support trench, the view was of the usual kind, a flat
Flanders plain, with ditches bordered by rows of pollard willows, and
wrecked farmhouses with a few scattered trees. The plain very gradually
rose to a sky-line, the Aubers ridge being especially marked on the
right. The British bombardment was persistent and, from what we could
see, effective, whereas the Germans only replied sporadically with
some sharp bursts of shrapnel and some high explosive shell on the
communication trenches, from which B and C Companies lost a few men.
The bombardment continued all along the front, on both sides of us, all
night with only two slight stoppages.

In reply to an enquiry from the artillery as to the amount of damage
done to the wire by the artillery fire in our line of advance, Major
Nickson replied that most of the wire had been destroyed. This was at
11 a.m. on the 15th June, 1915, and shrapnel was still bursting over
it. Captain Norman reported to the same effect, and said that all
stakes were gone, and such strips of wire as remained did not appear
to be an obstacle to an advance. He added that the wire opposite the
enemy’s main trench could not be observed clearly from our fire trench.

TUESDAY, 15th June, 1915.

The British bombardment continued as on the previous day, with the
Germans still only occasionally replying. Very heavy artillery (9.2)
was brought to bear upon the houses on the road to our immediate left
front, some being set on fire. It was particularly interesting to watch
this shelling, and to note the regularity and precision with which it
was shifted from house to house. The wire and the German sap and the
fire trenches were also kept under continual fire. An advanced mountain
battery played on the enemy’s parapets.

B Company was withdrawn to the support trench to the right of D
Company, whilst C Company moved to the right of the fire trench, making
room for the charging company of the 1/6th Cameronians on their left. A
Company was still in reserve.

Orders were received in the afternoon that the British bombardment
would increase greatly in intensity at 5 30 p.m., and would continue so
until 6 p.m. For this first half-hour, the guns would be concentrated
on the enemy’s barbed wire. At 6 p.m. they would “lift,” i.e., increase
their range on to the enemy’s fire trench and shell this solely for
three minutes. At 6 3 the communication trenches would be bombarded
for a minute, and the enemy’s main trench from 6 4 to 6 15. At 6 15
the guns would lift into the road, and would shell this intensely for
half-an-hour, until 6 45. At 6 45 the artillery would form a barrage
beyond the road.

At 5 30 promptly the bombardment became terrific. Shells whistled and
shrieked overhead in enormous numbers. All the British artillery which
was massed behind the line concentrated on the assaulting positions
with rapid fire. There were also some French 75 batteries to help.
Under this rain of shells B and D Companies moved up the communication
trenches towards the fire trench from the supports, and A Company to
the supports from the reserve line.

But while the British bombardment increased greatly in intensity, the
German shelling, from being merely desultory, also became intense. High
explosive shells, in salvoes of four, dropped upon the communication
trenches, filling them, in many places, with earth and mud, and in some
cases obliterating them. It became a task of extreme difficulty to move
up to the firing line under this heavy fire. There were some dead and
wounded in the trenches.

  [Illustration:

  _Sketch Map of Trenches_]

At 6 p.m. precisely C Company charged from the fire trench. The leading
platoon was a composite one, made up from Nos. 9 and 12 for strength,
and under the command of Second Lieutenant Parker; No. 10 Platoon
under Second Lieutenant Craven followed at 100 yards’ distance, and
No. 11 under Second Lieutenant Davies followed this. They had to climb
the parapet, and, under a withering fire, form to the left flank
slightly and then charge. They did this almost perfectly in line, and
were in possession of the trench inside three minutes. Their losses
were chiefly from rifle and machine gun fire. This must have been
principally from the main trench, and not the advanced trench of
the salient, since they found most of the Germans there sheltering
in dugouts; these were dealt with by bombing parties. The bombers
worked in two groups: (a) (right) 1/5th Royal Lancaster Regiment under
Lieutenant Taylor, and (b) 1/6th Scottish Rifles under Lieutenant Hay
(left group). These bombing parties, supported by the various parties
told off to them, did magnificent work, and penetrated right through
the road to a much greater distance than ever the assaulting battalions
reached.

Roughly it may be said that the centre of the attack was L 8 as marked
on the map. The two leading platoons of C Company, with their left
directing the whole attack, charged the German T-head sap directly in
front, and taking that in the rush, swept to the German fire trench. On
their left were the 1/6th Scottish Rifles also charging.

When the trench was won, comparatively easily, the Germans holding
up their hands and pleading for mercy, the bombing parties extended
outwards, down past Z 1, K 6, and Z 4. Their orders were to push ahead
as far as possible, since the 7th Division, as detailed, would be
attacking at the same time. Another party was to break off up towards
the German main trench at X 7. The other main party of bombers went
towards L 10 up the communication trench--which was also a firing
trench facing M 4--at L 10 they split off, one towards L 9 and the
other down the main German trench. These bombers actually went beyond
the road so fast that their bayonet men could not keep up with them.
They mostly ran along the top of the trench, with the German and
British Artillery both bombarding the lines all this time very heavily
indeed.

Red screens were used to show the furthermost points reached by the
infantry, to enable the artillery to support. The bombing parties
carried red flags, and a red rocket was to be fired when the infantry
reached the houses on the road at L 11. (The artillery had set these
houses on fire, and they afforded a good landmark.) But the artillery
observers could see nothing because of the tremendous smoke and
dust cloud, which hid the whole area from their view. All telephone
communication was very soon smashed up, and messages had to be sent by
relays of orderlies. Lieutenant Ord at L 8 was in charge of this.

The course of the battle becomes a little obscure. The next supporting
Company was B, but Captain Peak, for some time reported missing, has
lately been reported dead, and there is no connected account of what
actually happened to this Company. At this period the German artillery
redoubled in intensity on the deploying Companies, and whereas C
Company had suffered chiefly from rifle and machine gun fire, B and D
and A Companies suffered from shrapnel and high explosive. B Company
seems to have reinforced C Company on the right. B Company men say they
had to cross a deep ditch with barbed wire entanglements at the bottom.
(This must have been the ditch marked in front of the German fire
trench at Z 1). Here, they say, Captain Peak was killed on the barbed
wire in front of the trench.

D Company, coming up the now very badly damaged communication and fire
trench, was sent to reinforce the line in the left of the centre of the
attacking line across the sap and the fire trench, and then along the
edge of the communication trench towards L 10. Both B and D Companies
moved to support in lines of platoons, through a gap in the trench,
under extremely heavy artillery fire.

Meanwhile the attack had swept on, past the German trench, up along the
German communication trenches. There were a great number of casualties
from rifle fire from the German main trench and enfilading machine gun
fire from somewhere about X 7 or Z 2. But the attack swept on and must
have carried the main trench, already bombed, but for being pulled up
suddenly by uncut barbed wire, which lay concealed in the long grass on
the German (east) side of the ditch which runs parallel to the German
main trench, south-east from L 10. The attacking line was then within
30 yards of the trench. More enfilade fire came from one of the houses
at L 11 on the road. This house must have had a good number of machine
guns in it.

The position therefore about 7 p.m. was this:--

  [Illustration:

  Barbed wire marked in red wavy line.

  Red line marks approximate centre of attack.]

The Scottish Rifles were attacking on our left with their right resting
on the British sap head at L 8. Their advance was checked by uncut
barbed wire which ran along the northern edge of the communication
trench, very early on, and they lay in the open under galling and very
heavy fire, losing heavily in attempting to cut it, but were compelled
to advance along the communication trench. At 7 p.m. when the advance
was checked, they were in this communication trench, which they were
holding. Once a part of the German salient, it faced obliquely the
British trench at M 4; it was also a fire trench, being very narrow,
with numerous traverses and some dugouts about Z. The uncut wire here
in front of this trench prevented any further advance by them. All
their officers except one were casualties. The result of this forced
change of front by them was the formation of an angle at L 10 in the
line of attack, they themselves facing north, whilst the Loyal North
Lancashires faced east or perhaps north-east.

The ditch in which C Company lay, now reinforced by D on the left and B
on the right, with A coming up from reserve, was bordered by a row of
pollard willows. On the left it was comparatively dry, with a slight
protecting bank on the east (German) side; but the further it went to
the right the more of a quagmire it became. In some places on the right
it was thigh-deep in water. It ran parallel to the German trench along
the road, at about 30 yards’ distance from it. It afforded comparative
security after the advance because of the slight cover to be obtained
in it, and because it was too near the German trench to allow artillery
fire to be brought to bear. C Company had brought up one sandbag per
man and one shovel to every three men, with 20 wirecutters to the
Company, and B and A Companies had brought up three sandbags per man
and a pick or a shovel carried slung with spun yarn, per man, but some
of these were lost in the advance, and only a few men came up with them
all.

The Battalion entrenched itself in this ditch line as best it could.
It was rapidly going dark. A Company, as it came up, was sent to the
right of the line to strengthen and extend it and to get into touch
with the 7th Division, and several parties were sent out to the right
to find them, but fruitlessly. Entrenching in a waterlogged ditch
with the entrenching tool was slow work. At dusk the 1/4th King’s Own
sent up a Company to reinforce, under the command of Captain Barrow;
Major Nickson was in command of the front line. The Colonel had been
wounded earlier in the evening, and Major Foley took over command and
established his headquarters in the German fire trench opposite L 8.

About 11 p.m. there was a slackening of the German fire, both artillery
and rifle. The German artillery fire had been directed chiefly against
our supports and reserves, and was particularly violent at L 8. Some of
our wounded had been collected there, and were looked after there all
night by Sergeant-Major Farnworth.

By this time, in the front line, a machine gun had been placed in
position about L 10. The trench junction there had been blocked by
sandbags. It was at this point (L 10) that the Scottish Rifles were in
touch with us. It was found impossible, because of lack of material,
to block the further trench (X 7), and accordingly the line we held
in the ditch was bent back to the right to protect that flank. The
line was a bad one. There was a conference of Officers held by Major
Nickson. Both flanks were in the air. We were not in touch with the
7th Division, and enfilade rifle fire was coming from the right flank,
though fairly weak. The ditch was waterlogged, and too wide in places
and clearly marked by the row of pollard willows. Spades and picks and
sandbags were lacking. There were no bombs left, and no bombers. (There
were two advanced bomb reserves of 1,000 bombs each near L 8, but no
one knew where these were. The bombers sent to reinforce the original
party were shelled heavily on the road to the reserve trenches, and
out of 33 only five were unwounded.) Impossible to entrench ditch.
Therefore proposed line about 20 yards back in the open. This meant
beginning afresh without tools. Men too crowded in line. There were
no Verey lights. Artillery support had ceased about 8 45 because of
uncertainty as to the actual position of the attacking Battalions.
Major Nickson sent back word to Major Foley explaining this and asking
for instructions. In the meantime the German counter-attack began, and
prevented instructions arriving.

It was about midnight when the Germans began to throw up flares in
great numbers. They had been shelling L 10 and the (German) captured
salient for some time before. Their counter-attack proper began by
bombing at L 10 so severely that the machine gun there was damaged and
put out of action, and the connection with the Cameronians broken.
Almost at the same time, the Germans began to bomb down the right
communication trench (X 7), and followed this by throwing bombs
across the open. There was no means of replying, and no cover to be
had anywhere in the ditch. To stay there would have meant the wiping
out of those in the line; enfilade fire came from both flanks--on the
right from the German main trench at K 7, and on the left from L 9;
the Scottish Rifles in the German communication trench were enfiladed
down the whole length by artillery and rifle fire. Orders were given,
therefore, to retire from the position.

At the point Z (see map) a mixed body of men lined the shell craters
and held up the Germans for about two hours, losing heavily. This point
Z, which lay on the German side of their fire trench, was an absolute
mass of wrecked dugouts. These men finally retired, in the mist of
the morning, towards the sap south-west of L 8. In the retirement all
the attacking Battalions were mixed up. The sap at L 8 was held by
a composite company: 1/4th Loyal North Lancashires, 1/6th Scottish
Rifles, 1/4th Royal Lancaster Regiment, Grenadier Guards, 1/8th
Liverpool Irish, but the Germans, probably because of their check at Z,
did not push their counter-attack on to the British lines.

The attacking Battalions were withdrawn to the support trenches about 4
a.m. on the 16th, the men in the sap about 6 a.m., and the lines were
taken over by the 1/8th K.L. Regiment (Irish).

Motor machine guns under Captain Hammond, D.S.O., to left of L 8,
stayed up through the attack and for four days afterwards.

The casualties were heavy.

The Colonel was wounded at the beginning of the attack, when near L
8. Almost at the same time the Adjutant, Captain Norman, was severely
wounded. He advanced with the leading platoon and was on the parapet of
the German trench when he was wounded by, it is said, an officer hiding
in a dugout.

In C Company, Second Lieutenant P. Parker, who was in command of the
charging platoon was seriously wounded, Second Lieutenant Craven was
wounded in the leg, and Second Lieutenant Davies, who, wounded slightly
twice, would go on, was fatally wounded and died on the field.

In B Company, Captain Peak was reported killed, as previously
mentioned, but was posted missing, as there was no definite news of
what actually happened to him. Lieutenant Moore was wounded in the
wrist, and Captain Crump blown up and injured by a shell.

In D Company, Captain Hibbert was last seen directing the platoons
through the gap in the fire trench. After that no news can be obtained
of what happened to him, and he was posted missing. Captain Whitfield
was seriously wounded in the thighs by shrapnel and died in hospital at
Boulogne. Second Lieutenant Rawsthorn, in charge of the machine guns,
was killed by shell when leading his team across the open to the German
trenches. Lieutenant Brindle was hit on the head and in the arm.

In A Company, Lieutenant Smith[C] was in charge of the trench mortar
team during the bombardment, firing from the fire trench. When the
order to charge was given, Lieutenant Smith rushed forward with his
gun, and was seriously wounded when carrying it across the open. He
died in hospital at Lillers two days later, and was buried there.

The Officers who came through the fight unhurt were Major Foley, Major
Nickson, Captain Booth, Captain Widdows, Lieutenant Rennard, Lieutenant
Ord, Lieutenant Duckworth, Second Lieutenant Lindsay.

Second Lieutenant Rogerson was away at General Headquarters attending
a Machine Gun Course, and Lieutenant Gregson was attached to the
Grenadier Company at the time.

The casualties among the men were heavy, especially among the
N.C.O.’s.[D] They were:--

    Killed             26
    Wounded           266
    Missing           110
                      ---
        Total         402

It must be assumed that most of the missing are killed. The list
therefore stands with a high ratio of killed to wounded.

The respective strengths of the Companies on June 30th, according to
Orderly Room returns, were:--

    A Company       146
    B Company        99
    C Company       149
    D Company       126
                   ----
      Total         520

    15 Officers on strength. The effective rifle strength was 358.

The German trenches after the two days’ bombardment were in a bad
state. In many places they had been completely destroyed, and when we
took them we found them piled deep with German dead. The dugouts, which
had been made in the parados, seemed whole, but were full of dead and
wounded, probably the work of the bombers. The communication trench
was also partially destroyed, and littered with German dead. The whole
series of trenches were full of German equipment in great confusion.
Like our trenches, they were built of sandbags, but their communication
trench was very deep and well traversed, and was probably intended
to serve as a fire trench against M 4. There was an abandoned German
machine gun in the fire trench in a stretcher carriage, which could
not be moved. There was a good amount of German equipment outside the
trench about the point Z. This place was the wildest spot, a mass of
shell holes and fragments of works. The German barbed wire was very
strong, of abnormal thickness in closeness and strength of spikes and
in the wire itself. The ditch in front of the sap was heavily wired
under the water. The German casualties must have been very heavy. The
artillery Officers said they caught the reinforcements coming up on
the road first with the 4.5 howitzers, and later with the 9in. guns.
Bombers say something of what they saw there, but not all of them agree
on the point. The trenches were occupied at the time of the attack
by Bavarians, it is said. The counter-attack was made by the reserve
Division of the Prussian Guards.

The British trenches suffered severely too. In the morning L 8 was a
wreck, most of the trench battered down, and the communication trench,
which was revetted with hurdles, also badly damaged. The trench was
saved in many cases, though, by the hurdles bending and not collapsing
as sandbag revetting would have done. It was at L 8 that the brunt of
the firing was. In some places there the trench lines were completely
obliterated, and in very many places so badly damaged as to need
extensive repair before being of much use again.

The British report of June 16th, as issued by the Press Bureau, read:--

   “Yesterday evening, we captured the German front line of
   trenches east of Festubert, on a mile of front, but failed to
   hold them during the night against the strong counter-attacks
   delivered by the enemy.”

The communique issued at the German Main Headquarters says, according
to the “Daily Telegraph”:--

                                                  “Wednesday.

   “Again influenced by Russian defeats, the French and English
   yesterday attacked with strong forces of men at many points on
   the Western front.

   “On the other hand, two attacks of four English Divisions
   between the roads of Estaires--La Bassée and La Bassée Canal
   completely collapsed. Our brave Westphalian regiments and
   reinforcements, consisting of portions of our Guard, repulsed
   the attacks after desperate hand-to-hand fighting. The enemy
   suffered heavy losses. We captured several machine guns and
   one mine-throwing howitzer.”

JUNE 16th, 1915-JUNE 21st, 1915.

The Battalion regathered at LE TOURET and was given breakfast there
from the cookers which had been brought up, with a rum issue. The roll
was called, and only 243 men answered it.[E] We moved off about 10
a.m. In spite of their exhausted condition and their heavy losses, the
men marched well and in good spirits, singing for the first half-hour
of the journey, but a halt was made just before reaching billets for
the purposes of a rest. The day was very hot and close. The march was
resumed about 4 30 p.m., and billets at LE CORNET MALO were reached
about 5 30 p.m. Billets were of the usual type--barns with adjacent
orchards.

Lieutenant Ord was admitted to hospital on June 17th. The men were
very exhausted, and the days passed in resting and cleaning-up and
reorganising. All the Companies needed reorganising. B Company was
without an Officer until Lieutenant Gregson came back from the Bomb
School on June 19th. There was a great shortage of N.C.O.’s, since most
of them were casualties. B, C, and D Companies had an average of five
or six each, and A Company was not much better. Platoons were very weak
in strength. A few odd men rolled up during the first few days. One,
Corporal Smalley, of D Company, came in from the German lines wounded,
with German field dressings on his wounds.

The system of Officers messing by Companies had to be abandoned, and a
Battalion mess was reinstituted. This system was abandoned on the 9th
July, when three messes were constituted: Headquarters, A and B, and C
and D, when out of the trenches.

Brigadier-General Hibbert inspected the Battalion, together with the
1/8th Liverpool Regiment, on June 18th, and conveyed to Officers and
Men the appreciation of himself and of the Corps Commander for the
services they had rendered. He said that though the attack had failed
in its immediate object, yet it had been instrumental in attracting
to itself reinforcements which might otherwise have been directed
against the French, attacking further south. The G.O.C. Division
held an inspection on June 19th, and conveyed to us a message from
Field-Marshal Sir John French, congratulating the Brigade on the fight
it had made.




                             CHAPTER III.

                            TRENCH WARFARE.


Major Foley took over the command of the Battalion on June 16th, 1915,
vice Lieutenant-Colonel Hindle, wounded; Major Nickson became senior
Major, vice Major Foley, from the same date; Lieutenant Duckworth
became Adjutant, vice Captain Norman, wounded; Captain Widdows took
over command of C Company, vice Major Nickson; Lieutenant Rennard of D
Company, vice Captain Hibbert, missing; Lieutenant Gregson B Company,
vice Captain Peak, missing; Second Lieutenant Rogerson became Machine
Gun Officer, vice Second Lieutenant Rawsthorn, killed.

The weather was good and sunny, and we bathed in the LA BASSEE Canal.
Most of us were exhausted by the attack and in need of rest. Indents
for clothing and necessaries were rendered.

Orders were received on the 21st for the Battalion to proceed to
billets near LE TOURET. A working party of 200, under Captain Booth,
was detailed for work under the R.E. building a light railway.

JUNE 22nd-JUNE 24th.

The Battalion arrived in billets about 7 p.m., and took over the
billets of the 1/7th Royal Highlanders.

There was no working party to be furnished for the night, the 22nd/23rd
June, but one of 100 men under the command of Captain Widdows for the
night following. This working party was detailed for work in the firing
trench. The trench, which needed extra traverses and wider parapets,
was protected from the German view by an old ruined communication
trench which was to be demolished as soon as the new low fire trench
was ready for use, and in neither working party were there any
casualties.

This stay at LA COUTURE was quiet, and was devoted to resting and
reorganising. There was a little shelling of the village to our right,
but none near to us. Second Lieutenant Rogerson rejoined the Battalion
after a fortnight’s machine gun training.

JUNE 25th.

The Battalion moved off about 7 p.m. on the night of the 24th June, and
marched to ESTAIRES, where it arrived about 11 p.m., and was billeted,
the men being in factories or breweries. These billets were very
similar to the ones we occupied on May 18th. ESTAIRES is a fair-sized
town, a market town in many ways, with some industries. It was
interesting to us, because it was the first town we had been quartered
in since landing in France.

In the afternoon of June 25th, orders were received to move to the
trenches the same night. The Battalion marched to the trenches via
LAVENTIE, which had been heavily shelled by the enemy, but most of the
damage centred on the church, as in other villages where we had been.
Here the church, and the two roads which crossed near the church, as
well as the adjoining streets for a length of about 200 yards, were in
ruins; the nearer you got to the church centre the more intensive was
the damage. The inhabitants, however, were living in the village and
carrying on their business outside this shelled ring.

The trenches were reached at 8 30, and relief was completed by 9 p.m.
The Battalion we relieved was the 1/1st London Regiment (T.F.).

JUNE 26th-JULY 4th.

We spent eight days in these new trenches. They are known as “E 2
Lines, FAUQUISSART,” and were of the breastwork type, a shallow trench
first being dug to a little above the water level and a high parapet of
sandbags placed in front of this. The line we occupied was practically,
when allowances are made for the fact that it was a fire trench, the
equivalent of the reserve trenches which we held about June 10th. It
was the same line. The British here had been able to make no headway.
The parapet was very good and very thick as a rule, but much of the
parados was shaky and had to be rebuilt. The long grass in front had
already been partly cut by the previous trench holders, and there was
a fair amount of wire in front, but not too much. The enemy was about
300 yards off, but the lines were not exactly parallel, and at one
point the enemy must have been nearly five hundred yards away. There
was very much less shell fire than in the previous trenches we had
held, and very much more rifle shooting. There was a number of fixed
rifle batteries with which the enemy tried to break the sandbags.
There were also snipers normally to be found firing from a flank. The
telescopic-sighted rifle, which had been issued to the Battalion just
before entering the trenches, proved very useful for sniping in return.
These rifles were the short rifles, fitted with telescopic sights, with
a crossed hair-line on the object lens and a range dial. One ran to 600
yards and the other 1,200 yards in range.

A, B, and D Companies were in the trench line, with C Company in
reserve holding an entrenched post. These “forts” took the place of the
support line in the trenches we had been in before and were intended
as defensive and rallying points in case of an attack. Battalion
Headquarters was in the open.

Second Lieutenant Evans, who had been left behind with Second
Lieutenant Norwood at Oxted when the Battalion moved to Bedford
preparatory to sailing for France, rejoined the Battalion from the
2/4th Loyal North Lancashire Regiment on the night of June 26th.

On June 27th, Second Lieutenant R. A. Ostrehan and Second Lieutenant E.
G. Baker, from the 2/4th Battalion, joined the Battalion, and Second
Lieutenant D. H. Ostrehan joined on the night of the 28th.

To the left of our positions, the opposing lines narrowed down until in
one place, known as Red Lamp Corner, they were no more than fifty yards
apart. A mine was sprung here by us one morning at dawn, and shook the
earth around. There was a short bombardment by our artillery of the
mine crater and of the enemy line, and a slight reply from the German
artillery, which bombarded the position much more heavily two days
later, but these bombardments did not affect us.

JULY 4th-JULY 9th.

The Battalion was relieved in the night of the 3rd/4th July about 10
p.m. by the 1/7th Gordon Highlanders, and marched off to billets in
the ESTAIRES--LA BASSEE road, near LA GORGUE, taking over billets from
the 1/5th Seaforth Highlanders. The billets were of the usual type,
orchards and farm buildings. The Officers’ Mess was established in the
local schoolroom.

The six days’ rest from the trenches was interrupted by a series of
working parties, which swallowed the whole available strength of
the Battalion, Officers’ servants, signallers, stretcher-bearers,
transport, and machine gunners all having to be impanelled in order to
provide the number required. The work done was miscellaneous--digging
in communication trenches, improving communication trench parapets,
laying a level bed for a light trench railway, &c. This resulted in
most of the men sleeping all day. New clothing was issued on the
4th July, and a day was set apart for bathing the Battalion in the
brewery-bathhouse. This bathhouse had been made by taking vats from the
brewery and tubs, and filling these with hot water. Men filed in at one
door and gave up their dirty underclothing, and tied their clothes into
a bundle, fastened with their identity disc. Each man was issued there
with clean shirt and underclothing, whilst his old garments were washed
and cleaned. Facilities were provided for bathing a Company at a time.
Six baths for Officers were laid down also. This hot bath was greatly
appreciated by the men; it was the first one they had had since landing.

The G.O.C. Indian Corps, to which the Division had been attached,
inspected the Brigade on Wednesday, July 7th. The Battalion paraded as
strong as possible, and put 293 rifles into the field. The General,
Sir James Wilcox, expressed himself as well satisfied with the Brigade
and welcomed them back to the Indian Corps, which they had temporarily
left, expressing a hope that they were back for good.

JULY 10th-JULY 15th.

In these six days the Battalion was on trench duty in F lines, a
little to the right of our previous position. The trenches were of the
same type as those of E 2 Lines, consisting of a strong breastwork
sandbagged trench, only a little sunk below the level of the ground,
with several supporting points in rear. The whole Battalion was in the
line, with the exception of Battalion Headquarters, which were situated
about 1,000 yards back from the firing line in a farmhouse. Captain
Booth was sent to hospital from here.

Nothing of much moment happened to us in these lines. There was one
very wet night, which left the trenches in a very bad condition for
the following day. What shelling there was was directed upon the house
behind us; very few shells fell on the trench.

Our casualties amounted to one killed and three wounded in this period,
mainly from sniping, which was fairly active. We had a sniping post,
heavily sandbagged, in an orchard to the rear of the line, and a
sniping party with telescopic-sighted rifles to garrison it.

There was an order that equipment must never be removed for any
purpose. One day a man emerging from his billet with equipment on but
the shoulder straps of his jacket unbuttoned cannoned into the R.S.M.,
who accused him of having had his equipment off. This he denied, and
muttered that he had just been having breakfast. “Do you need to
unbutton your shoulder straps to have breakfast, then?” enquired the
R.S.M. in his silkiest tones. The man stood glowering for a moment, and
then in desperation burst out, “Well! Ah’ve got to saay summat, ’evn’t
I?”

We were relieved on the night of the 16th/17th July by the 1/4th Royal
Lancaster Regiment, about 10 p.m., and moved off to reserve billets
near Headquarters. Detachments from A Company, under Second Lieutenant
Evans, and C Company, under Second Lieutenant R. A. Ostrehan,
garrisoned “fort” supporting points behind the line. There was a heavy
trench mortar bombardment of the trenches held by the 2/5th Lancashire
Fusiliers on the night of the 19th/20th July, which caused a Brigade
“stand-to,” but nothing happened. The 2/5th Lancashire Fusiliers had
rejoined the Brigade the week before.

The Brigade was relieved on the night of the 23rd/24th July by the 13th
Brigade, the Battalion by the 1st Middlesex Regiment.

On the 27th we left for LA GORGUE Station, where we entrained, and
arrived at CALAIS at 8 p.m., then on via ABBEVILLE and AMIENS to
CORBIE, where we detrained and marched to billets at RIBEMONT. On the
31st we went to MARTINSART, being then in Divisional Reserve. Here we
remained for a week training.

This SOMME country was a great change from the plains of Flanders, and
the air was better.

We relieved the 25th Lancashire Fusiliers on the 6th August in Sector
B. A, B, and C Companies were in the fire trench; D Company in
support at POSTE LESDOS; Battalion Headquarters in AVELUY WOOD south
of AUTHUILLE. The trenches were cut in the solid chalk--hardly any
sandbags--and the French had made the dugouts very comfortable. The
barbed wire was thick. On the 4th Second Lieutenant W. R. Haggas had
reported from the 2/4th Loyal North Lancashires, bringing five N.C.O.’s
and men, who had been wounded, from the base, and a week later
Lieutenant-Colonel Hindle returned from England and again took over the
command of the Battalion. On the 9th a thunderstorm broke and turned
the trenches into mud. On the 11th the first party went on leave. Two
men were wounded the same day. The sector was quiet, and so was LA
BOISELLE sector, where we went on the 14th, relieving the 1/5th Irish.
C and D Companies were in the fire trench; A and B in support at POSTE
DONNEZ. The opposing lines were so close that high bomb nets were found
necessary.

On the 21st we were relieved by the 1/5th King’s Liverpool Regiment,
and went into billets at AVELUY. It is chronicled in the War Diary
that at this time the men began to have hot tea and soup served about
midnight and that one-third were allowed to sleep at night. On the 22nd
a draft was received from the 2/4th Loyal North Lancashire Regiment
of 101 Other Ranks, and the following day four Officers, Second
Lieutenants A. B. Bratton and H. M. Strong, from the 3rd Loyal North
Lancashires, and Second Lieutenants J. S. Walker and M. W. Nolan, from
the 11th Loyal North Lancashires, joined.

On the morning of September 4th the enemy shelled the trenches at POSTE
LESDOS fairly heavily, and one shell burst in the midst of a working
party, killing one and wounding five Other Ranks of D Company, whilst
a week later one Other Rank was killed. On the 17th Lieutenant-Colonel
Foley left the Battalion and crossed to England to take over command of
a third-line unit. The succeeding day, just before being relieved by
the 1/8th Liverpool Irish, the trenches were again heavily shelled, and
one Company Sergeant-Major, one Sergeant, and one Corporal were killed
by a single shell, whilst three Other Ranks were wounded. Captain H.
Parker, Captain J. A. Crump, and Lieutenants K. H. Moore, R. Ord,
and J. L. Brindle rejoined the Battalion from the 3/4th Loyal North
Lancashires, and the first-named three Officers took over the command
of A, B, and C Companies respectively.

At this time Companies of one of the Service Battalions of the Highland
Light Infantry were attached to us for instruction.

On October 1st Brigadier-General J. L. Hibbert was wounded in the
shoulder, and Lieutenant-Colonel Hindle took over the temporary command
of the Brigade, while Major Nickson took over the Battalion with
Captain Crump as second. Captain Rennard and Second Lieutenant Norwood
went into hospital the same day, and Captain Gregson on the 3rd, and
on the 4th Captain Green, R.A.M.C., reported for duty, vice Lieutenant
Sugars transferred to the 3rd Battalion. Lieutenant-Colonel Hindle
returned to the Battalion on the 7th, and Brigadier-General G. T. G.
Edwards, C.B., took over command of the Brigade.

On the whole the month was quiet. On the 3rd we went into the line,
A, C, and D in front and B in support at POSTE LESDOS--being relieved
on the 15th by the 2/5th Lancashire Fusiliers, when B and C Companies
relieved the 1/8th Irish on the right of F 1 sector, A and D being in
support at POSTE DONNEZ; here we stayed till the 21st, going back to
AVELUY, whence nightly working parties went up the line.

On the 27th, “fur” coats were issued, and we went back to POSTE LESDOS
sector.

On the 28th, the enemy bombarded the wire and front line from 7 10 a.m.
to 9 30 a.m., doing considerable damage and blowing in 100 yards of
trench between AINTREE STREET and MERSEY STREET, held by C Company, and
30 yards in A Company’s sector. C.S.M. Edwards earned the D.C.M. for
manoeuvring his Company about during the shelling in such a way as to
escape with very few casualties.

The whole of the month was quiet and uneventful, but there was some
desultory shelling of the working parties; salvos of H.E. and H.V.
shells were sent over hourly, and in one of these bursts on the 30th
Major Nickson was killed, whilst Second Lieutenant Bratton and six
Other Ranks were wounded.

On the 31st Captain J. O. Widdows went sick and Second Lieutenant Nolan
and 20 Other Ranks were wounded, the total casualties for the month
being:--Officers: killed one, wounded two, sick four; Other Ranks:
killed one, wounded 35, missing one.

Early in November Second Lieutenant R. S. De Blaby reported for duty
from the base. On the 2nd an enemy shell burst in the trench held by
A Company, killing two men and wounding one, whilst five others were
admitted to hospital suffering from shock. Two mornings later two
shells landed at the junction of Aintree Street and the fire trench,
killing three men and wounding three others who were waiting as sentry
reliefs. About this time, owing to the number of sick and wounded
(the trenches were in a very bad state and knee-deep in water through
the torrential rains and the men were very wet), it became extremely
difficult to find the requisite number of men for the different duties
each day.

On the 5th Lieutenant-Colonel Hindle went on leave for nine days,
Captain Crump taking over command, and during that period the weather
was so bad, snow falling on several of the days, that the programme of
training could not be carried out. On the 18th Second Lieutenants T.
A. Burnside, F. R. Best, and M. Wilson joined, and on the 20th one man
was killed during an enemy burst of 30 small shells in reply to our
artillery’s work on the German trenches.

On the 25th Bomber Gent did very good work. Taking nine bombs with
him, he went out alone, and, encountering an enemy patrol coming from
a sap-head, bombed them with good effect. The following day Lieutenant
K. H. Moore was killed by a sniper. The month’s casualties consisted of
one Officer killed, and of Other Ranks eight killed, three wounded, and
95 sick.

On December 2nd, at BOUZINCOURT, C.Q.M.S. E. E. Lester was presented
with the Croix de Guerre for conspicuous bravery at Festubert on June
15th. This ceremony took place on Battalion parade. Second Lieutenant
A. Hague arrived from the 3/4th Loyal North Lancashires, and later
in the month Second Lieutenants A. Parker and Fairclough joined for
duty, whilst Second Lieutenant Bryce-Smith rejoined from the base. As
Christmas approached the weather was very bad, and the sides of the
trenches were continually falling in. There were pumps in plenty,
but the water ran in as fast as it could be pumped out. On Christmas
Day we were relieved by the 1/4th King’s Own, and managed to get a
good dinner, thanks to our excellent Quartermaster, Lieutenant Baker.
The casualties during December consisted of 2 Other Ranks wounded and
82 sick, and for the whole year 23 Officers (4 killed, 10 wounded, 2
missing, 2 died of wounds, and 5 sick), and 624 Other Ranks (30 killed,
271 wounded, 146 missing, and 177 sick).

New Year’s Day, 1916, dawned wet and dismal in the trenches at
AUTHUILLE, and though the general situation was quiet our trench mortar
batteries were in action for a time. It was during the evening’s
retaliation that a shell blew in a dugout, killing Second Lieutenant F.
R. Best and wounding Second Lieutenants H. Rogerson and R. A. Ostrehan
and three Other Ranks. The following day the Battalion was relieved
by the 16th Battalion Lancashire Fusiliers, and moved to billets at
LAVIEVILLE, six miles away. The following day the Brigade left the 51st
Division, and, moving off from HENENCOURT, we marched via BEHENCOURT
to ST. GRATIEN and a day later to RAINNEVILLE. The Brigade stayed at
RAINNEVILLE a day and a half, the time being spent in a much-needed
clean-up, and at this point--on January 5th--we became the 164th
Infantry Brigade of the 55th Division.

On the 6th we left the 13th Corps to move to the new Divisional area,
the 55th Division being then part of the 14th Corps. The march was via
BERTANGLES, VAUX-EN-AMIENS to ARGOEUVES, the Battalion subsequently
moving independently to AIRAINES, via ST. SAUVNEUR, PICQUIGNY, and
SOUES, reinforcements arriving from the base the day after the
Battalion had been billeted. Company training was carried out, and we
had the task of finding control posts for all entrances to the village
to prevent British Army horses from entering on account of the number
of diseased horses there. On the 14th Second Lieutenants Silveira,
Agostini, and Matthews arrived from the 3/4th Loyal North Lancashire
Regiment. The Brigadier should have inspected the Brigade the following
day at COURCHON, but the event was cancelled owing to rain, and
Battalion drill took place instead. In the afternoon the A.S.C.’s
Picture Palace was booked and the men given a free show. During the
week a bombing school, bayonet course, and rifle range were fixed up,
and excellent progress was made with the training. On the 20th of
January Major Parker took over the Battalion on Lieutenant-Colonel
Hindle’s departure on leave. During the remainder of the stay there the
training was rounded off by an attack over open country, a gas test in
the presence of the G.O.C. of the Division, and instruction in grenade
throwing for all the Officers and N.C.O.’s, before, ultimately, General
Allenby inspected the Division near HALLENCOURT, on the 29th.

On February 2nd the Earl of Derby inspected the Battalion at VIEULAINE,
and the following day we proceeded to billets at LONGPRE, whence
the Brigade, less two Battalions, marched to new billets, Brigade
Headquarters proceeding to RIBEACOURT, 2/5th Lancashire Fusiliers
to BEAUMETZ, and the 1/4th Loyal North Lancashires to PROUVILLE.
At AUTHEUX, a few days later, the Battalion and Platoon bombers
were inspected in their work by the G.O.C. of the 55th Division,
Major-General Jeudwine. “Old Judy,” as he was called, soon found a
place in our hearts--he had the gift of inspiring those under him--and
we all loved him.

About this time the Brigade experienced the French winter at its worst
in so far as rain was concerned, conditions being so bad that no
training was possible for two days. The men found welcome relief when
the downpour ceased by participating in a five miles cross-country run.
On the 15th the Brigade marched from HEM, via DOULLENS, to HALLOY and
on to BELLEVUE, where units broke off to their respective villages,
the 1/4th continuing the march via BAVINCOURT and GOUY-EN-ARTOIS to
MONCHIET. Three nights afterwards hostile aircraft flew over the
village and dropped two bombs not far from our lines. There were no
casualties. Shortly before noon the following day an enemy ’plane
again flew over the village, dropping a bomb about 150 yards from the
huts, once more without effecting any damage. On the 23rd orders were
received for the Battalion to go into the trenches to take over from
the 1/5th King’s Liverpool Regiment. There was a heavy fall of snow
that afternoon, followed by a frost at night, and we moved into the
line the following night. The enemy was very quiet on this front and
apt to show himself a good deal. Lieutenant-Colonel Hindle took over
the command the day following the Battalion’s arrival. About this time
the trenches became very wet owing to the thaw, and the discomforts
familiar at these times recurred. Meanwhile the enemy indulged in
rather more sniping than usual, while a visit by a dozen hostile
aeroplanes one morning was accompanied by activity on the part of his
artillery. There were no casualties or cases of sickness during the
month--a record.

March also was quite uneventful. A German deserter surrendered to
us, and there was only a single casualty during the month, one man
being wounded. But on April 1st, while A, B, and C Companies were
billeted at BRETENCOURT, the enemy fired about three salvoes to the
west of the village, and one shell burst in a barn occupied by No. 15
Platoon (D Company), killed six men, and wounded eight others. On the
9th Lieutenant-Colonel Hindle went to the 3rd Army School, and Major
Crump took command of the Battalion during his week’s absence. On
the 23rd, while rifle grenades were being fired, one exploded in our
lines and would have caused serious loss of life, but Private Carter
threw himself upon it and received the full force of the burst. He was
killed, and Second Lieutenant Wilson, trying at the same time to grasp
the grenade and throw it away, lost his hand. Lieutenant-Colonel Hindle
went on leave on the 27th, Major Crump taking over the command. During
the month, in addition to the casualties referred to, there were seven
men killed and a like number wounded.

On 1st April, while the Battalion was at GROSVILLE, four cavalry
N.C.O.’s were attached, two from the 1st Dragoon Guards and two
from the Inniskilling Dragoons. On the 4th the Battalion took over
slightly to the right of the former frontage, the left Company
frontage being taken over by the 165th Brigade. Owing to shortage of
Officers, A and C Companies worked as one in respect of Officers’
duties. Lieutenant-Colonel Hindle resumed his command two days before
the Battalion was relieved. As soon as duty again lay in the shape of
trench life, it was discovered that though the enemy was very quiet
there appeared to be a great amount of work in progress in his lines.
One day the enemy shelled the front line with “Five-nines,” but there
was no material damage. Obviously the object of the shoot was to
discover trench mortar emplacements. During the next two days there was
again some shelling, and on the 30th, during a “strafe” of the right
Company, Second Lieutenant Eccles was killed, the only other casualties
during the whole of the month being two Other Ranks killed and two
wounded.

Shortly after mid-day, June 4th, our artillery and trench mortars
opened an intense bombardment on the enemy wire, and this was replied
to by heavy fire for half-an-hour, mainly on our support lines and
communication trenches, but no severe damage was done, and, although
the dressing station behind the support line was blown in, there were
no casualties. The following day Second Lieutenant Ducksbury reported
for duty from the base. The time was mainly occupied in training
bombing parties, scouting, wire cutting and crawling, and cutting new
pattern fire steps under R.E. supervision.

A special raiding party was practising and was increased to four
Officers (Captain Gregson, and Second Lieutenants Martin, Roscoe,
and Walker) and 15 N.C.O.’s and men per company, who were billeted
separately in the village and trained. Short rifles and long bayonets
were issued to the Battalion on the afternoon of the 19th, and long
rifles and short bayonets withdrawn. The same day the Battalion
moved up to AGNY to relieve the South Lancashires, the raiding party
remaining at BRETENCOURT. Although the enemy shelled and sent over
rifle grenades within the next few days, little damage was done and
there were no casualties. Here we first met a large trench mortar
called “Crashing Christopher”--the “Heavy Minnie” of later days.

  [Illustration: The Battalion about to Parade for the Trenches, 1916.]




                              CHAPTER IV.

                          THE SOMME FIGHTING.


On the 27th of June we were bombarded by all calibres, but sustained no
casualties.

On the 28th the raiding party of three Officers and 56 Other Ranks
mentioned in the last chapter left our lines at the junction of GAMBLER
STREET with the fire trench at 5 35 p.m. The raid was preceded by the
discharge of cloud gas and artillery fire.

This party was working in conjunction with raiding parties from all
Battalions in the Division. They advanced by two rushes to within a few
yards of the enemy trenches, where they came under heavy fire and were
held up. At 5 50 p.m. they established communication with our lines
and reported that they could get no further and were suffering heavy
casualties. A Sergeant returning and reporting that the enemy were in
strong force and further progress was impossible, Major Crump ordered
them to retire, which they did in good order in spite of losses which
included the whole of the leaders.

The wind seemed to be uncertain and blew back the smoke curtain
diagonally across the front so as to disclose our party, which was on
the right flank of the Division, to the enemy.

The enemy wire had been well cut and presented no obstacle, but the
enemy were seen in force in the trenches to the north of BLAIRVILLE
WOOD, some of them wearing box respirators. The gas, however,
apparently did not reach the wood, but near our lines a number of enemy
dead were observed who had obviously been killed by the gas. Corporal
Thompson did admirable work in maintaining telephonic communication
between the advanced portions and the Headquarters of the Brigade
raiding parties in our own front line. Private Clarke and Corporal
Thompson remained in a shell hole not far from the enemy wire until
after nightfall and saw them come out of their trenches and carry some
of our men who were either dead or wounded across the bridge into their
trenches. The ten killed of the raiding party included Captain E. M.
Gregson and Second Lieutenant A. Martin, whilst Second Lieutenant A. S.
Walker was amongst the 18 wounded.

The Lancashire Fusiliers’ party (who also came under command of Major
Crump) advanced quickly and rushed the last few yards before effecting
an entrance into the enemy trenches. They divided into three parties,
which bombed along the fire trench before being attacked by enemy
bombers coming across the open. They were then ordered to retire, which
they did after suffering casualties. A private of the left party did
good work with his bayonet, keeping the enemy at bay until the last of
his party had left the trench; for this he was awarded the Victoria
Cross. All the parties came under machine gun and rifle fire, but they
inflicted a large number of casualties before returning. There were
no trench boards in the enemy line where our men entered them, and
the trenches had obviously suffered considerably from our artillery
fire. The enemy threw “stink” bombs into their own wire, but most of
the wounded were brought in by our men, who, however, brought back no
prisoners and no material, except a cap taken from a German soldier for
identification purposes.

Captain G. C. Hutchinson, of the Lancashire Fusiliers, though severely
wounded in the German wire, did capital work in this raid, as he
continued to direct operations after being hit. Lance-Sergeant Russ and
Private Bennett, of the same Battalion, assisted several wounded men
back to our lines and later brought in Captain Hutchinson. Sergeant
Entwistle, who brought back reports on the progress of the raid,
returned to assist in carrying out the retirement, whilst Private Ward
and another collected five wounded in a shell hole and brought them in
one at a time under heavy machine gun and shell fire.

A Private who was with the party writes:--“Captain Gregson was there; I
never saw him look better--he was always one of the smartest Officers
in the Battalion, but he seemed to have been got up for the show with
greater care than usual. The smoke lifted like a curtain. We were in
full view of the Boche trench. We went on till within 50 yards of it
and then he opened out with machine guns, rifles, and trench mortars.
It was Hell let loose, but someone shouted ‘On the Kellys,’ and on
we went, but were cut down like corn. The ‘Jerrys’ were two-deep in
their trench, and we realised we were done.” Sixteen men answered the
roll-call out of 76. “The worst part of a stunt is always after, when
they have a roll-call. To stand there and listen to names being called
and try to answer ‘He’s killed’--no one can picture it who hasn’t seen
one.”

The total casualties for the month were two Other Ranks killed, six
wounded, and 26 sick, including four Officers.

On the afternoon of July 1st, the enemy shelled our reserve and support
trenches and also the village of AGNY with 4.2’s, whilst late at night
he opened fire on the front line with “whizzbangs” and 4.2’s, trench
mortars, rifle grenades, and machine guns. He also sent up a large
number of flares, but our artillery replied and activities ceased
within an hour.

The following day Lieutenant-Colonel Hindle went to hospital, and Major
Crump again assumed command of the Battalion. There was considerable
enemy activity with artillery and trench mortars, whilst our aeroplanes
were active. The trenches were damaged by enemy gunfire the following
day, when Second Lieutenant Jump and three Other Ranks were wounded.
The Battalion was relieved by the 2/5th Lancashire Fusiliers on the
4th, and went to billets at DAINEVILLE; Colonel Hindle returned the
same day, but on the 7th he again had to go to hospital. On the 10th
we practised over trenches similar to those we expected to attack.
The attack was practised several times, and on the night of the 11th
the Battalion relieved the 1/6th King’s Liverpools. Two nights later
the Brigade made a demonstration, Second Lieutenant Saunders being in
charge of a party which went over at midnight to bomb an enemy sap.
Though they were unable to enter the sap, owing to wire being uncut,
a number of bombs were thrown into it, and it was not until the party
returned that the enemy replied with light machine gun and rifle fire.

On the 16th, 76 reinforcements joined the unit, which was relieved
by the 1/4th King’s Own and marched to BARLY, where we rehearsed
trench attacks and signalling in conjunction with aeroplanes. Later
the Battalion marched by stages to CANDAS, where it entrained for
MERICOURT. Arriving there on the 11th, we marched to billets in MEAULTE
and on the following day to HAPPY VALLEY, where we bivouacked.

The weather was fine and the billets good at this time, and training
was carried out on an extensive scale, the work including practising
digging-in with entrenching tools. One afternoon men marched to BRAY
and bathed in the Somme, where, unfortunately, one man was drowned.

On the 30th July, Church Parade was held, at which Brigadier-General
G. T. G. Edwards presented Sergeants Entwistle and Lancaster with
Military Medal Ribbons won by them in the raids at BLAIRVILLE. Late
that afternoon orders were received to be ready to move at very short
notice, and the same night the Battalion left for the trenches at
GUILLEMONT, occupying some old German communication trenches (Dublin
and Casement trenches), which contained no dugouts. Within a few hours
of the Battalion’s arrival the enemy opened out on the trenches and
battery positions in the vicinity with 5.9’s and heavier shell. Second
Lieutenants Orrell and Crone were wounded, as also were 15 Other Ranks.
The total casualties for the month were three Officers and 34 Other
Ranks.

August was a trying month. The line held extended from MALTZHORN FARM,
where we linked up with the French on the right, to a point near ARROW
HEAD COPSE. The trenches were incomplete, as they were newly dug,
and besides being narrow and shallow, they had not been joined up in
several places. The enemy bombardment was more or less severe every
day, and on the 3rd Second Lieutenants C. S. Munro and J. Hunt were
wounded, along with 16 Other Ranks, whilst three men were killed. About
this time enemy snipers were very active along a ridge about 150 yards
ahead, where they appeared to have established themselves. This ridge
was on the south side of and abutted on the sunken road which ran from
our line to GUILLEMONT. Part of this sunken road was held as a trench
by the 2/5th Lancashire Fusiliers, who were thus enfiladed by the enemy
snipers on the ridge and consequently had a considerable number of
casualties daily, the losses among the Officers being especially heavy.

It was decided, therefore, to attack this ridge and establish a
strong point there which would deny that ground to the enemy. This
minor operation was considered important in view of the casualties
mentioned and also because it would afford facilities for reconnoitring
GUILLEMONT and the lines of approach, this being most essential in view
of the contemplated general attack on the GUILLEMONT--MAUREPAS line.

At a conference held by the Brigadier with Major Crump and Major
H. Parker, it was decided that Major Parker should carry out the
operation with two strong platoons of D Company on the evening of the
5th of August; that under Brigade arrangements communication trenches
(which were exceedingly narrow) should be kept clear to facilitate the
movement of the troops taking part in the attack up to the front line;
and that a barrage would be put down by the Divisional artillery who
would also do counter-battery work.

  [Illustration]

When the attacking party commenced to move up to the starting-off
place, it was found that the communication trenches had not been
cleared as arranged, and it would have been impossible to get up in
time by using them. The party therefore moved up over the open and
managed to arrive in time, but, unfortunately, not till after dark.

Second Lieutenant A. Hague and his platoon attacked. The second platoon
with consolidating material was kept in reserve in our front line, but
the enemy was found to be in considerable force on the ridge, occupying
a strong point, and a switch line running back towards Wedge Wood.

The attacking platoon encountered heavy rifle and machine gun fire,
and our barrage brought down enemy artillery fire, which caused
considerable loss to working parties in communication trenches. Three
attacks in all were made, but finally the attempt had to be abandoned
for that night. Second Lieutenant Hague was reported missing, two men
were killed, and 25 wounded.

Major Parker subsequently reported to the Brigadier that he thought
that he could attain his objective on the evening of the 6th August,
provided he was allowed to attack at dusk without barrage but with
only five minutes’ preparation with two Stokes’ Mortars, and this plan
was assented to. The same troops were employed, having been brought up
to strength. The attacking platoon, led by Lieutenant R. S. De Blaby,
attacked at 20.30 hours. The attack was successful, the position was
consolidated, and our troops were relieved by the 1/5th Liverpool
Regiment just before dawn. During consolidation Major Parker went out
with a patrol and located the enemy switch line, finding it heavily
wired and strongly held.

The troops engaged in this operation rejoined the Battalion (which had
been withdrawn to reserve) on the morning of the 7th August.

After a night in bivouacs, preparations were made to go over the ground
prior to an attack on GUILLEMONT on the 8th. The Battalion returned
to the line that night and assembled in trenches east and west of the
road which ran south from the east corner of TRONES WOOD, C Company
being detailed to consolidate the right of the enemy line and D Company
the left on the west side of GUILLEMONT. A and B Companies acted in
conjunction with the 1/4th Royal Lancasters and the 1/8th Liverpool
Regiments respectively. The attack was not a success. The right was
held up from the start by the switch line which had been reported by
our patrol on the 6th, such report having been either overlooked or
ignored, and the men had to fall back to the original line, though the
1/8th Liverpools went through the village on the left, and D Company
of our Battalion commenced to consolidate, but were driven off by the
enemy coming behind them and cutting them off from the Liverpools.

Considerable confusion was caused owing to the mist and the employment
by the enemy of smoke bombs, the four platoons in reserve not being
called upon for this reason, though all their officers were killed and
they suffered many other casualties. The operation was a costly one.
Nine Other Ranks were killed, 97 wounded, and 107 reported missing;
whilst of the Officers, Captain E. M. Rennard and Captain H. Lindsay
were killed, Second Lieutenants O. H. Ducksbury and J. H. Holden
missing (afterwards found to be prisoners of war), and Lieutenants De
Blaby and A. T. D. Evans and Second Lieutenants E. L. Fairclough and T.
A. Bigger wounded. Lieutenant De Blaby died the following day.

On the 9th of August the remnant of the Battalion was relieved by one
Company of the 1/5th South Lancashires and marched to bivouacs, where
Lieutenant-Colonel Hindle again took over command.

Three days after coming out of the line a large permanent working party
of 150 men, under Major Parker, proceeded to the trenches to the 2/5th
Lancashire Fusiliers, who were also detailed for the same work, and
on the 14th August Major Parker was wounded. The Brigade subsequently
left the area. The Battalion which had been strengthened by drafts of
100 men from the Manchesters and one Officer and 110 Other Ranks from
the East Lancashire Regiment, entraining at MERICOURT and detraining
at ABBEVILLE, marched to billets in SAIGNEVILLE, via CAMBRON and GOUY.
Here training proceeded on the usual lines, whilst a lecture was given
to the Officers and N.C.O.’s of the Brigade by Major-General H. S.
Jeudwine. The General used the tail of a cart as a platform--without
warning it tipped up and sent him sprawling in the road. This was too
much for the gravity of the troops--and of the General himself. No one
laughed more heartily than he did as he picked himself up and resumed
the thread of the lecture--this time from the ground level.

Battalion sports were held whilst the unit was at rest, and in
the closing days of the month the Battalion returned by train to
MERICOURT, marching to a camping ground at MILLENCOURT, whence Captain
L. Duckworth went to hospital, whilst the Battalion again moved a
short distance to another area, where all ranks were accommodated
in tents. The total casualties for the month were 13 Officers and
289 Other Ranks. After a couple of days’ “rest” at MILLENCOURT, the
Battalion was sent for instructional purposes to take over the left of
an old Corps line trench running between the ALBERT--AMIENS road and
the ALBERT--MILLENCOURT road. On relieving the 8th King’s Liverpool
Regiment in the Corps line, the Battalion spent the night rehearsing
the numerous phases of trench warfare, one Company building a “strong
point.” The following day this was repeated, and some of the time was
spent in wiring and patrolling. The Battalion was relieved by the 1/8th
(Irish) King’s Liverpool Regiment on the night of September 3rd. Three
days later the Battalion moved from MILLENCOURT to a camping ground
near FRICOURT, where it was joined by Captain S. B. Donald, of the
5th East Kents (Buffs), and Captain C. B. Bolingbroke, of the 1/6th
Norfolks. Orders to go into the trenches were received the following
day, and the Battalion marched to MONTAUBAN where it was met by guides
of the 8th Devons. The sector taken over by the Brigade extended from
the eastern edge of DELVILLE WOOD in the direction of GINCHY, the 1/4th
Loyal North Lancashires being in the front line alongside the 2/5th
Lancashire Fusiliers, and the remainder of the Brigade in support.
Captain C. H. Cockrill reported for duty from the 1/6th Norfolks on the
8th, on which day we had four killed and 19 wounded.

The DELVILLE WOOD battle started on the 9th September. The British
artillery were in action all day, and at 4 p.m. the barrage started; at
4 45 the Division on our left attacked. Our objective was to capture
HOP ALLEY with B and C Companies, whilst the Lancashire Fusiliers were
to go over with us and take ALE ALLEY. At 5 25 the Battalion went over
and the first objective--HOP ALLEY--was gained, but the second wave
did not succeed in reaching ALE ALLEY, and as HOP ALLEY had become
untenable under intense machine gun barrage and gunfire, the remnant
of B and C Companies withdrew and fell back to their original line.
Supporting Companies from the 1/8th King’s Liverpool Regiment and 1/4th
Loyal North Lancashire Regiment were sent up to strengthen the lines,
whilst working parties consolidated the position. Sergeant H. Farnworth
was awarded the D.C.M. for work in this attack.

  [Illustration]

The casualties were heavy; amongst the 24 killed were Second
Lieutenants W. E. Pyke and E. F. Falby, whilst, in addition to 125 men,
Captains Donald and Bolingbroke, Lieutenant H. W. Strong, and Second
Lieutenants W. V. Gray, P. Pollard, F. R. Vipond, C. H. Forshaw, and
W. H. Berry were wounded. Under the heading of missing were the names
of 79 of the rank and file. As the result of these heavy losses the
Battalion was withdrawn from the front line to the supports and rested
for the day. In the afternoon we stood-to in view of a possible attack
by the enemy. Though remaining in support, the Battalion was moved
1,000 yards nearer the front line for the remainder of its stay until
the 41st Brigade came up as relief on September 12th, when we marched
to bivouacs near FRICOURT.

The customary routine was followed during the “rest,” during which
a move was made to BUIRE. Brigadier-General Edwards handed over the
Brigade to Brigadier-General C. I. Stockwell, who was quickly dubbed
“Strafing Jimmy.” He was a good soldier, and his methods, though often
resented by individuals, were effective. He continued to command the
164th Brigade till the Armistice.

  [Illustration]

On the 19th, after being ordered to go into the line at FRICOURT, where
were the 1/8th King’s Liverpool Regiment, we were suddenly ordered
to vacate the trenches and proceed to bivouacs at MAMETZ, where six
days were spent in Company training, during which specially large
working parties were employed in digging a communication trench through
LONGUEVAL.

On the 24th a Battalion of the 165th Infantry Brigade was relieved by
us in front of DELVILLE WOOD close to FLERS. On the 25th and 26th one
Other Rank was killed and 22 wounded. On the latter day we relieved the
1/7th King’s Liverpool Regiment in GIRD TRENCH, close to GUEDECOURT.
That day we had 17 wounded and 3 missing.

Following great activity by our artillery, the 164th Brigade attacked
in the afternoon of the 27th, the Battalion being in support. The 8th
Irish captured the part of GIRD SUPPORT still occupied by the enemy,
and in the course of the evening we relieved the Irish in the captured
trench, one Company occupying a sunken road running into GUEDECOURT.
The casualties were very slight, but Second Lieutenant R. Forrest was
killed and Second Lieutenant G. Duerden and 4 Other Ranks were wounded.

The following morning mist hung low over the battlefield, and when
it cleared a large enemy party was observed to be digging-in along a
line rather more than half a mile away. Rifle and machine gun fire
was directed at them, and they ceased work abruptly after suffering
a number of casualties. During the afternoon the enemy artillery
retaliated, killing 6 men and wounding 30.

The 10th Royal West Kents relieved us on the 29th, and we went into
billets at DERNANCOURT. Thus ended an eventful month, in which the
Battalion had suffered somewhat heavily, the total casualties being
3 Officers and 33 Other Ranks killed, 9 Officers and 211 Other Ranks
wounded, 82 Other Ranks missing, and 2 Officers and 54 Other Ranks
sick.




                              CHAPTER V.

 TRENCH WARFARE IN THE SALIENT: October 1st, 1916, to July 14th, 1917.


On the 1st October we left MANANCOURT and entrained at EDGE HILL,
arriving in billets at L’ETOILE at 11 p.m. The following day we marched
to LONGPRE, where we entrained for POPERINGHE, where we were billeted
for the night. The next day we marched to BRANDHOEK, where we were
in huts for the next few days, furnishing a daily working party to
dig a cable trench near RIGERSBERG CHATEAU. During this period Second
Lieutenant G. Duerden joined us again, and the following Officers as
reinforcements:--Captain A. Walsh, Second Lieutenants G. Tong, F. C.
Jenkinson, V. Mather, A. O. Knight, I. Haworth, F. L. Vernon, E. G.
Faber, A. Bardsley, A. Ashton, E. E. Tweedale, H. Holden, H. Swaine, R.
V. Reed, B. H. Williams, J. E. Ordish, R. Bissett, J. H. Ogden, and H.
K. Vipond.

During these days we did Company training, in preparation for our debut
in the SALIENT.

THE SALIENT! How can one hope to describe it so as to bring home its
realities to those who have never seen it? Yet without some such
description the history of the next few months would be about as
informative as the stereotyped official bulletin, “On the rest of the
Front there was nothing to report.”

Picture then POPERINGHE, a typical Belgian town, with here and there
a house partly demolished by shell fire, crawling with troops of
all kinds, with shops, restaurants, and estaminets, sprinkled with
English notices, such as “Divisional Headquarters,” “Wind Dangerous,”
“Officers’ Club,” “Divisional Canteen,” and so on. This was our centre
of civilisation. Beyond it stretched eastwards the YPRES road, fringed
at first with tall trees and a sprinkling of houses, and peopled with
troops, lurries, guns, limbers--coming and going, twelve kilometres of
it, with deep ditches on either side, and beyond them fields which had
once been cultivated but were now given over to “dumps,” camps, battery
positions, and so on, a few fields being still under cultivation by
women and old men.

After six kilometres we come to VLAMERTINGHE, badly knocked about,
but with a certain number of houses still standing and used by our
troops; a thin slice of the tower of the church remaining to give the
Hun a range mark; from this point the road is under enemy observation,
and one begins to notice shell holes and broken trees becoming more
frequent as we near YPRES railway station, to which trains still
run, but only at night with all lights out, drawn very slowly and
silently by a mysterious engine which shuts off steam and proceeds by
electricity or something of the kind as it nears YPRES.

  [Illustration: Map No. 2

  THE YPRES SALIENT]

Standing on the “platform” at YPRES station at night, you see the enemy
flares going up all round you except on the west, and you realise that
you are indeed in “The Salient.”

The city of YPRES itself, which at first sight seems like a jumble of
ruins, you find presently to contain hiding-places for dozens of guns
and hundreds of troops; whole streets of houses remain standing, mostly
minus windows or doors. By day, the streets are almost deserted; by
night, though no lights are shown, the city is alive with parties of
troops, mule-drawn limbers, waggons, and motor lurries, bringing up
rations and ammunition and the baggage of incoming Battalions.

All these come along the road from VLAM after dusk, and when things
are in full swing the road is a wonderful sight--mile after mile of
mixed Army vehicles tightly packed along both sides, the middle full of
marching troops. Sometimes motionless, sometimes crawling cautiously
on in the dark, sometimes disturbed by a shell falling and killing a
few men or a mule or smashing up a lurry in its crashing burst, hour
by hour the stream goes on, the very life-blood of the Infantry in the
Salient.

From YPRES to the front line was at this time about two miles, first by
road, then tracks, then trenches or breastworks, through wrecked and
ruined country, weedgrown and desolate.

Each Battalion held a “sub-sector” of the line, Battalion Headquarters
being in some group of dugouts or ruined chateau about a mile behind
the front line with the reserve and support Companies somewhat nearer,
and two front line Companies. In addition to the Infantry Battalions,
there were posts held by machine guns, this weapon having been taken
out of the hands of the infantry, trench mortar sections, and other
details doing various jobs.

The country in general is rather like HUNDRED END, the soil being like
the Lancashire clay, but wetter and stickier.

On the 15th we moved up to YPRES, where we were billeted in the
RAMPARTS. These RAMPARTS billets merit a special description. The city
is guarded on the east and south by a rampart and moat, the rampart
being about 50 feet high, and of equal thickness and formed of earth
taken out when the moat was dug, faced with brick on the outside and
crowned with trees.

Under this mines had been made, stuffy, cramped places full of frames
and props and dimly lit with electric light, generally overcrowded and
always damp and rat-infested, but still places where the Battalion
in Brigade reserve could lie down and sleep in comparative safety,
except for the danger of gas. To the south of the MENIN GATE, an ugly
gap in the ramparts through which the MENIN ROAD issued from the city
and where it was never safe to linger, was one of such mines usually
occupied by two Companies, to the north a similar one and the Officers’
dugouts, Battalion Headquarters being further back in the city. On the
night of a relief, men would arrive in small parties in the pitch dark
and stumble along the street, which was always a foot deep in mud, till
they found the gas sentry, when they would disappear within the dark
entry with a grunt of relief.

During the next few days working parties went up the line every night,
and on the evening of the 19th we relieved the 1/4th King’s Own in the
RAILWAY WOOD sector.

RAILWAY WOOD had once been, as the name implies, a wood beside the
MENIN railway; when we made its acquaintance it was just a churned-up,
slimy bit of rising ground, approached by a decent communication trench
called WEST LANE crossing the muddy BELLEWARDEBEEK, beyond which were
the breastworks and dugouts and cookhouses forming BEEK Trench, a mass
of slime and rotten sandbags which it was part of our job to drain,
duckboard, and rivet with corrugated iron. As nearly every trench in
the Salient was in a like state, and repairs were soon spotted and
strafed by the Hun, and as every available man was daily employed in
repairs, et cetera, it will be seen that “Old Bill’s” opinion, that
the war would only end “when the whole of Belgium had been put into
sandbags,” had much to justify it.

Going up to the front line from BEEK Trench on a dark night was no
picnic. You started along a narrow alley winding uphill, your hands
feeling the slimy sandbag walls, your feet wary for broken duckboards;
now and again a hot, stuffy smell, a void space in the wall, and the
swish of pumped-up water under foot proclaimed the entrance to a mine.
Gradually the sandbag walls got higher and the alley narrower, and
in places you stumbled into daylight where the trench had been blown
in and got covered with blue slime wallowing across the block; round
corners you dived under narrow tunnels two or three feet high, finally
emerging into the comparative open of the front line trench.

When we were in Brigade reserve in YPRES, the working parties sent
out at night often had this journey to do, after a two mile tramp and
heavily laden with shovels, duckboards, barbed wire, and so on, but
there was no falling-out, and little grousing.

A feature of this sector was the craters and shell-hole posts out in
the open in front, garrisoned by small parties of men; there they
lay--cold, wet, and sleepy--for hours on end, visited at intervals by
an Officer or N.C.O.

On the 20th Captain Ord was appointed Commandant of the 164th Brigade
Officers’ School, and Major A. H. Haslam joined us. On the 22nd 16
“Minnies” fell on our front line, wounding Second Lieutenant J. F.
Walmsley and J. H. Ogden; the following night we were relieved by
the 1/5th King’s Liverpool Regiment and went back to YPRES to the
PRISON and MAGAZINE billets. These two buildings had not been greatly
damaged, and the MAGAZINE was fairly shell-proof. We sent the usual
nightly working parties up the line till the 27th, when we relieved
the 1/4th King’s Own in WEILTJE sector, to the north of RAILWAY WOOD;
here the Hun was further off and things were a bit more comfortable.[F]
Second Lieutenants Reed, Tong, Vipond, and Vernon were posted to
other Battalions on the 29th. The tour was quiet on the whole, and on
the 31st a piece of the enemy’s parapet fell in, giving our snipers
a splendid chance--they claimed three certain hits. That night we
were relieved by the 1/5th King’s Own and marched back to C Camp,
a collection of wooden huts distributed in a roadside copse near
BRANDHOEK, a little bit of Heaven to weary and sodden men coming out of
the line. Here we could sleep and feed in peace, do refitting, physical
jerks and parades, and play football.

During the month no less than three Officers and 55 men had gone sick
and been sent to Field Ambulance (also known as “Fanny Adams”)--for
which the change to the Flanders clay was no doubt largely responsible.

We remained at C Camp till the 8th November, when we moved up to YPRES
again and were billeted in the RAMPARTS and the SCHOOL; the latter was
a large building on the MENIN ROAD outside the city and made a decent
billet till the gunners put a large gun in it, with the usual sequel.

During the next three days we sent a working party of 250 up the line
every night. Major Crump rejoined the Battalion on the 11th.

On the 12th we relieved the 1/4th King’s Own in the RAILWAY WOOD
sector, B and C Companies being in the front line, A and D in support
in BEEK Trench. Captain Houghton rejoined the Battalion.

On the night of the 13th the moon shone beautifully and disclosed our
wiring party to the Hun about 100 yards off. Second Lieutenant Higson
was hit; the next night our Lewis guns retorted on Hun working parties.

Every day brought its ration of “Minnies,” shells and bullets, and
someone got hit; Second Lieutenant Walton was killed by a sniper’s
bullet on the 16th. The sniper was promptly shot by one of ours.

On the 17th, at 11 p.m., for half an hour, we strafed the Boche with
guns, heavy and Stokes’ trench mortars and rifle grenades, to stir him
up--the usual tactics of the 55th Division; he retaliated feebly and
wounded only one man; a fighting patrol then went out, but found no Hun
about.

On the 18th, at 8 45 a.m., 18 heavy “Minnies” fell on B Company,
wounding two men; our guns retaliated--they always did for
“Minnies”--to discourage them. I think we all hated and feared the
“Minnie” more than anything, chiefly on account of the deafening,
nerve-shattering effect of the explosion; if you watched you could see
them coming over like an oil-drum describing slowly a parabola in the
air--and could dodge them and watch the fall from a safe distance, then
a pause, then CRRRAAASH! and up went sandbags, earth, wood, iron, and
sometimes men, leaving a crater of raw crumbly earth to be dealt with
as soon as might be.

In the evening we were relieved by the 1/5th King’s Liverpool Regiment,
and straggled systematically back to YPRES--billeted this time in the
Prison and Magazine.

The Officers now with the Battalion were as follows:--

    Lieutenant-Colonel R. Hindle, Commanding.
    Major Crump, Second in Command.
    Second Lieutenant R. N. Buckmaster, Adjutant.
    Second Lieutenant Burnside, Transport.
    Lieutenant Bardsley, Quartermaster.
    Second Lieutenant Lowe, Lewis Guns.
    Second Lieutenant Mather, Bombs.
    Second Lieutenant Williams, Sniping and Intelligence.

    Captain A. T. Houghton        }
    Captain A. Walsh              }
    Second Lieutenant Tyldesley   } A Company.
    Second Lieutenant Bissett     }
    Second Lieutenant Cooper      }

    Captain F. S. Baker[G]        }
    Second Lieutenant Agostini    } B Company.
    Second Lieutenant Robinson    }
    Second Lieutenant H. Holden   }

    Captain Hore                  }
    Lieutenant Tautz              } C Company.
    Second Lieutenant R. Hall     }
    Second Lieutenant Ashcroft    }

    Captain Matthew               }
    Lieutenant Howarth            }
    Second Lieutenant Holmes      } D Company.
    Second Lieutenant Brown       }

The next five days were spent in cleaning up and bathing--a ceremony in
which a whole Company filed into an old building labelled “Divisional
Baths,” handed in their underclothing, stood in tubs under a trickle of
warm water and washed as best they might, receiving “clean” clothes in
return, and came away cleaner and fresher men. The inverted commas in
the last sentence are a tribute to the longevity and indestructibility
of the louse, or “chat,” and her eggs; no process was ever discovered
by which they could be extirpated, except “handpicking.” (Some people
may think this reference a little indelicate, but this is a truthful
record.)

The usual nightly working parties went up the line, until, on the
24th, we relieved the 1/4th King’s Own in the WIELTJE Sector. A and D
Companies were in the front line, C Company in support in “New X Line,”
and B in reserve, Battalion Headquarters being at POTIJZE CHATEAU.

The relief started badly, a “Minnie” strafe during the morning having
blown in the front line in several places, incidentally blowing
a Company Commander out of his dugout; the strafing went on all
afternoon, but luckily ceased at dusk, and the relief passed off
without incident.

This sector was a distinct improvement on RAILWAY WOOD. The Hun was
about 400 yards away, and there was consequently hardly any trench
mortar activity and no mining, but the wire was thin, the drainage bad,
and the Company Headquarters mere shanties, while most of the sentry
posts had to make shift with a groundsheet for sleeping accommodation,
the old traverses and dugouts having been knocked in and never
repaired. The reserve Company in CONGREVE WALK was more comfortable,
being well hidden in dead ground, and their trench was clean and dry--a
nice change after their tour in the worst bit of RAILWAY WOOD.

That night was quiet, and our patrols and wirers were busy in No Man’s
Land; rain fell during the night, and breakfasts were very late in the
morning.

The following description of a typical day in the front line is for the
edification of those who have never been there; how we longed to bring
some of our stay-at-home acquaintances out there and rub their noses in
Flanders mud--the real stay-at-homes, the profiteer, C.O., agitator,
striker--the folk who, in accordance with what Lewis Carroll called
“the glorious British Principle of Political Dichotomy,” were doing
their best to nullify our efforts in the fighting line!

The day begins at “Stand to,” about an hour before dawn, when
the Officer and N.C.O. on duty go round rousing every one with a
hoarsely-whispered, “Wake up, there--Stand to!” reinforced by a shake
as each man comes slowly up out of the wells of sleep and stumbles to
his feet, rubs his eyes, grabs his rifle, and mounts the fire step. The
Company Commander rouses the signaller, or vice versa, and every one
sniffs the cold night air and hopes that “Jerry” won’t come over this
morning.

Slowly the darkness thins; faces become visible, then sandbags, then
duckboards, then the screwposts supporting the wire in front; suddenly
a lark stirs, mounts up and bursts into his fervent song--the dawn has
come, and the Company Commander gives the word “Stand down,” which
is passed along and acted on promptly, so that in a minute only the
sentry on each post is left on duty. For we no longer hold the line
continuously--our numbers are too small--but with a certain number
of sentry posts, each consisting of an N.C.O. and, when possible,
six men--more often four--some posts being Lewis gun posts, others
bombing posts, others riflemen only. This line of posts, weak as it
is, is strung out between and in front of a series of “strong points”
containing machine guns and an infantry garrison lodged in deep mines,
while behind us is the support Company ready to come up in case of
need, and reserve troops further back; in addition we have the guns,
which we can always switch on in a few seconds by telephone or sending
up a rocket; all these things give us confidence, weak though we feel
ourselves to be.

About this time there appears in the trench an Officer from the reserve
Company, followed by sweating men carrying knapsack food-containers
and dixies. The word “Breakfast up” is hardly needed, as already a
man from each post is waiting with both hands full of mess tins to
draw the bacon and tea for his post--bread and dry stuff was issued by
the Company Quartermaster-Sergeant the night before. The sentries are
excluded from the ensuing munching until such time as a chum, his meal
swallowed, is available for relief; never for an instant, by day or
night, must that vigilant watch over No Man’s Land cease.

The Officers crowd into the Company Headquarters or crawl into their
own “caboosh” and eat their food in privacy, the same food as the rest
but on a plate, sometimes with porridge and eggs, privately purchased,
in addition--the Army issues the same ration to all ranks, but extras
can be bought at canteens in YPRES.

After breakfast comes cleaning and inspecting rifles, while the Company
Commander, who has already had a look round and detailed the day’s
work to the Company Sergeant-Major, completes and sends down by runner
to Battalion Headquarters his Trench State and account of ammunition
expended; then adjusting his tube helmet and box respirator and
tightening his belt carrying his revolver and glasses (it is a standing
order that everyone must wear his equipment all the time in the front
line), he sets out to inspect his lines, finding, if he knows his job,
a cheery word for all and sundry, and receiving often better than he
gives, taking stock of everything, strafing slackers, and generally
tuning up for the day, well knowing that, if he misses anything, the
Commanding Officer or, worse still, the Brigadier, will spot it and
strafe him!

Each sentry post has its standing orders pinned up on a board, with a
duty roster showing each man’s work through the 24 hours, and ensuring
that each gets eight hours in which he may try to sleep, and a sheet
for intelligence, which is collected by the Intelligence Officer every
morning when he visits the sniping posts.

“Dinners up” is the signal for a general break and a repetition of the
breakfast scene, but the food is stew or roast meat and potatoes or
rissoles. At 1 30 p.m. casualty returns and special indents have to be
at Battalion Headquarters, and at 3 30 p.m. a report on the situation
and direction of wind (this latter with reference to possible gas
activities). Having to render this report in the middle of a strafe,
some sorely-tried Officer is said to have written, “Situation----, Wind
vertical!”

Long before this we have all washed (or dabbed) our hands and faces in
shell-hole water and shaved as best we can, and an inspection of box
respirators has been carried out by the Officer on duty; feet are also
inspected and rubbed with whale oil to guard against trench-feet, then
work is resumed till tea, after which it is time to stand-to again for
another hour.

Then the night routine begins; the men who have worked all day
“get down to it,” while the wirers begin to slide over the parapet
with their rolls of barbed wire and posts; the patrol puts on
boiler-suits and cap-comforters--each man leaving behind any possible
identification, and slides off into the waste, fitfully lit by enemy
flares, in front of us.

The Officer and N.C.O. on duty start their tour of the line, candles
are lit in Company Headquarters and correspondence is dealt with, while
the Company Commander has another good look round while waiting for
the patrol to return; when they come in the leader’s report has to be
reduced to writing--often no easy matter when an unfortunate reference
to “enemy seen” raises a perfect hail of questions from higher
authority, truculently asking why they were not instantly gone for and
spitted! Picture Second Lieutenant Snooks, on patrol for the first or
second time with three men, sent out to examine enemy wire, shivering
and squirming his way across NO MAN’S LAND, all eyes and ears, suddenly
hearing guttural voices and seeing six or more figures looming big in
the haze. Of course, he ought to bluff them and bring them in--that is
what you would do, Reader, wouldn’t you?--but he doesn’t; he remembers
that he was told to examine wire, not to make trouble, so he crouches
motionless in the mud till they pass, and thinks he has done the right
thing--till he sends in his report. Then, all at once, the Brigadier,
the Colonel, the Company Commander send for him, and ask him abruptly,
and with degrees of rudeness befitting their respective ranks, what
the ---- he meant by letting those Boches escape! Needless to say, he
never repeats the mistake! And in time he learns that in the Division
and the Battalion it is a criminal offence to let slip any opportunity
of killing, capturing, or annoying Boche!

About 10 p.m. is “tea up,” and the rum issue is mixed with this or
with the breakfast tea at the discretion of the Company Commander.
The patrol and other men coming in cold and wet need theirs at once,
followed by a walk down to the Brigade drying room, where they can
sleep in blankets before a brazier while their clothes are dried.

With the patrol’s return operations usually close for the night, and
about midnight, having dealt with the last batch of chits which a
thoughtful and zealous runner has seen fit to pick off the Adjutant’s
table and deliver, asking searching questions about the “number of
sandbags laid” or “the number of screw posts, long, salved” the day
before, or the name of a man used to operating an electric light plant
or minding pigeons or mixing cocktails (“nil returns to be rendered!”
which means “If none, say so”), the Company Commander, who alone has
no allotted sleeping time, takes off his tin hat, loosens his belt,
and sleeps. At 3 a.m. the Officer on duty, who does a four-hour spell,
sends in another “situation and wind report,” and waits for the hour
when he can stir up everyone else for “stand-to,” strolling from one
post to another and keeping an eye on things in general and the Boche
in particular.

It is very quiet, probably raining a little; nothing on the move,
except rats. What brutes they were, those rats of the Salient! huge
mangy brutes the size of a cat, a few patches of fur on their otherwise
bare pink bodies; getting under your feet, running over your face as
you lay trying to sleep, eating through haversacks to get the biscuits
within, scurrying, scratching, gnawing all night long!

To resume the thread of the story:--The following extracts from a
Company Commander’s diary, given under the dates on which they were
written, help to give life to an otherwise bald narrative:--

25th. “This dugout is very poor and the roof is leaky--my canvas bucket
catches most of the drip, however.... Have just been entering up
Logbook sitting in the dugout with a candle for company--caked in mud,
sandbags over my boots--feet cold, raining outside, but quite cheerful,
as I am expecting some hot stew before long. The old skin-lined coats
are no longer issued; instead we have leather jerkins lined with
fleece, very warm and comfy.”

26th. “To-day is apparently Sunday, but out here one can’t tell it
except by the calendar; the daily hate goes on much as usual--in fact
to-day we have been hating the Boche rather extra much. Our guns have
been slowly and deliberately knocking his front line to blazes all
day, but if I know anything of him he will be about half a mile behind
down a hole of some sort--we all go to ground in these days: ‘They
shall go into the caves and dens of the rocks, they shall say unto
the mountains, “Fall on us” and to the hills “Cover us,” men’s hearts
failing them for fear and for looking for those things which are coming
on the earth’--a wonderful book, the Bible!... One of the men said
to-day, ‘The Boche isn’t here, Sir; he’s gone to the Somme and left his
missus to look after this place!’ ... How nice a change of boots will
be!”

27th. “A fighting patrol under Second Lieutenant Agostini went out but
encountered no enemy. At 7 30 p.m. we were relieved by the 1/5th South
Lancashires; they were very strong and all arrived together instead
of post by post and the narrow trench was jammed with men so that
our fellows had a struggle to get out. However, we got out without a
casualty, assembled at YPRES station, and trained to BRANDHOEK, whence
we marched to C Camp for a rest.”

28th. “‘Cleaning and inspection of kit,’” says the War Diary. We always
lay long on the morning after relief, no one worried anyone else till
noon at least. “To-day I had a bath! Oooooooh! Nothing can describe
the utter luxury of it when for several days you haven’t even had
your revolver off! A real one and lie down in it! I feel another man
already! Nothing of special interest, very busy inspecting, cleaning
up, repairing, and generally getting ready for the trenches.... It’s
still very cold and difficult to keep warm; these huts have no glass
in the windows, but horn, sacking or linen, so one always writes by
candle-light. We have a gramophone in the Mess which plays all day
and cheers us much. ‘O, Cecilia! Don’t make those eyes at me!’ is a
great favourite, especially with the Padre, who says the sentiment is
exceedingly proper!”

The following days were devoted to Company training, and on Sunday
December 3rd, 1916, there was a Church Parade. Our Diarist writes:
“We are still in rest, and it’s still freezing--coke is bad to get
in quantity--to-day we are very short; food is plentiful, there are
Y.M.C.A. huts and canteens and places about where one can buy baccy,
biscuits, fruit, etc.--the important thing is that all eatables must
be in tins, otherwise the rats get the lot.... In spite of cold, dirt,
and discomfort, it’s a good life on the whole, and one’s conscience
is at rest; we’re part of an Army--and a fine Army--and the Army is
abundantly cheerful.”

Our numbers at this time were very low, three more Officers and 37
Other Ranks having gone sick during the month.

On 6th December, we were inspected in mass by the Corps Commander, an
amusing inspection which rather showed up the lack of horsemanship of
some Company Commanders. As a result a Battalion riding school was
started, and carried on whenever we were in “rest.” The following day
we moved up to YPRES (RAMPARTS and SCHOOL), and on the 8th relieved the
1/6th King’s Liverpool Regiment in RAILWAY WOOD. The following day our
artillery was active, strafing the enemy front line; we received some
“Minnies” in exchange. During the night our field guns and machine guns
fired on enemy communications; he retaliated with shells and “Minnies.”

In the support trench (BEEK) were many home-made weather vanes,
somewhat out of adjustment, and one day, in directing a stranger to
Company Headquarters, someone said, “Keep along the trench and you’ll
see several weather-cocks.” “Yes,” broke in a humorist, “to show the
various Norths!”

On the 11th the activity on both sides was renewed, but without
serious damage. Of course trenches were blown in and there were many
narrow escapes, but only two men were wounded in the three days. It
was always a standing wonder that so much metal could fly about in
horrid, jagged bits, knocking trenches about, missing men by inches,
demolishing dugouts, and yet cause so few casualties. For example,
three men were lying in a low dugout with an iron roof; a shell struck
the front edge, burying the men and at the same time saving them from
its own explosion, which took place simultaneously! Men are sometimes
literally struck dumb at these times, as witness the following true
story:--Scene--a slight shelter; Officer inside, Private at entrance;
three shells fall in quick succession, the first and second miss the
shelter by a foot or two and make the usual noise and mess, the third
hurtles down and buries itself at the very entrance--a long pause, then
a small, unnatural voice, “That’s a dud, sir!” Another pause, another
voice of like quality, “Yes, I see it is!”

The 12th was very quiet. A drizzling rain fell all morning, mixed with
snow later. The following day we were told to prepare for relief, and
had the satisfaction of seeing, during the afternoon, our heavies
putting some really big stuff on the Hun lines; in the evening we
returned to our YPRES billets.

14th. YPRES was shelled fairly heavily and we had one casualty; our
guns were also very active. “What an awful row these big guns make when
they go off; if you’re anywhere near them the noise seems to box your
ears and make you deaf for some seconds.”

15th. “Our guns were making a fair old row last night and this morning,
celebrating the Kaiser’s peace proposals, I suppose--what a difference
from the old RICHEBURG days! To-night, about 4 30, the Hun suddenly
started shelling this place to some tune and kept it up for half an
hour; quite a lot burst near our dugout and there was a good bit of
stuff flying about, but no one was hit.” During these days the usual
nightly working parties filed through the MENIN GATE and went up the
line to shovel slime for a few hours.

On 17th December, 1916, we moved to PRISON billets and into the line
again--WIELTJE--on the 18th.

On the 19th a dozen “Minnies” fell on our front line--again no one
was hurt; on 20th December, 1916, the Hun shelled us all day; no
casualties, bitter wind and snow, aeroplanes active, a Hun machine
being brought down over their lines at 1 15.

21st December, 1916. Great artillery activity. Our front line trenches
were cleared with the exception of a few Lewis guns from 8 a.m. to 4
p.m. Our heavies bombarded the enemy trenches from 8 a.m. to 10 a.m.
The field guns cut wire opposite our front line from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m.,
after which the heavies resumed operations. In the evening a patrol
located an enemy sentry post in the Long Sap. On the 22nd the artillery
programme was repeated; the enemy retaliated and caused one casuality.
On the 23rd the 1/4th King’s Own raided over our heads, entering the
enemy trenches and finding them deserted; the enemy retaliated heavily,
causing three casualties, one man (Duerden) being killed in the front
line by a bit of shell. As the front line was simply plastered with
shells, we were lucky not to have more.

“There was a pretty heavy strafe this morning early,” writes the
Diarist; “it went on for about an hour and left one kind of dazed and
sleepy.”

Christmas Eve was very quiet; the great question was, “Were we to stay
in the line over Christmas or not?” Our joy on hearing that we were to
go out was tempered by pity for the King’s Own, who relieved us.

Christmas Day. “Out of trenches! Came out last night and forthwith
had a shave and partial wash. We sent an Officer on, and when we
landed here (YPRES) the men found candles lit and fires going in their
billets, and we had ditto in ours. To-day we gave the men a decent
Christmas dinner, and are now about to have one ourselves--a roaring
fire, plenty of candles, turkey stuffed with _the_ stuffing, beer, vin
ordinaire, pudding, and sundries have the promise of a very pleasant
evening in them, if the Boche will refrain from throwing stuff over--he
peppered this place some to-day! To-morrow, work--pulling things
together--refitting, cleaning, reorganising; to-night, Christmas Day,
home thoughts, comfort and God bless everyone, especially those at
home, who are always with us in thought--what we owe to their prayers
no man knows.”

Second Lieutenant Tyldesley was largely responsible for the success
of the dinner referred to. The Battalion dined in the MAGAZINE, two
Companies at a time, on hastily-made tables and waited on by the
Officers; there was pork and goose mixed (Tyldesley’s tunic bore the
marks of goose-grease for long after), and trimmings, plum pudding
and dessert and fruit and beaucoup beer, and we drank “The King” and
everyone enjoyed themselves.

26th. “Everyone in splendid form after a day’s rest and a good feed, a
sort of cheery, alert look on everyone’s face that I haven’t seen for a
long time.” 220 men were on working parties that day, and on the 27th
we were relieved by the 1/5th South Lancashires and went back to C
Camp, this time by train--‘the Midnight Choo-choo’ as some wit dubbed
it. The silent assembly of troops at YPRES Station, the entraining,
and the gradual withdrawal of the train from that stricken area into
cultivated country, are some of the things we shall never cease to
recall with complete vividness. The following days were devoted to the
usual cleaning and inspections, etc.

  [Illustration:

      CHRISTMAS 1916.

      BEST WISHES _from_

      “We’re here because we’re here”.     _SHAKESPEARE._

  Battalion Christmas Card, 1916.

  _Drawn by 2nd-Lieutenant Ashton._]

“To-day I have had all my men inspected for deficiencies and paid them;
I find an excellent plan is to require a man to produce a chit from his
Platoon Commander stating that he has been fully inspected before he is
paid; by adopting this plan I get all sorts of people up for inspection
who would otherwise probably have been missed. To-morrow I get my
Company on parade for a whole morning--a most unusual occurrence and
one to be made the most of.”

The 31st December found us still at C Camp--clean, fresh, and ready for
another year of war, though fervently hoping for peace.

Our total casualties for the year were as follows:--

                           Officers.   Other Ranks.
    Killed                      9           69
    Wounded                    23          434
    Missing                     1          190
      Do.   believed killed     2            0
    Drowned                     0            1
    Sick to F.A.               16          204
                               --          ---
        Totals                 51          898

The New Year started with a Brigade holiday, and in the Church Army
hut the men were given a dinner followed by a cinema performance; the
Sergeants and Officers also had dinners in their respective messes. “A
dinner of stew, mixed pork, and goose, and plum pudding, and beer in a
mess tin, means more to the men to-day than all the elaborate spread we
had at SEVENOAKS, which cost £150.”

During this period reinforcements of Officers and men kept turning up,
and were rapidly assimilated; on the other hand, almost every day some
Officer or man went sick, the weather on the whole being mild and damp.

On 3rd January, 1917, we were inspected by the Brigade Commander, and
were complimented on the turnout, also on the camp; in fact at this
time Brigade were rather fond of us and let us alone quite a lot.

On the 5th the Lewis gun detachments with their handcarts were
inspected by the Divisional Commander; he caused great mirth by
wheeling a handcart violently at a ditch, to demonstrate how easily the
shafts broke! At this time the Lewis gun was in a transition stage and
the favourite toy of the staff; it was finding its feet as a Company
weapon, and masses of orders about it were coming in every day, to the
joy(?) of all concerned.

On the 6th we returned to YPRES, and on the 7th relieved the 1/6th
King’s Liverpool Regiment in RAILWAY WOOD, where we were badly shelled
the following day, six men being wounded. This relief was accomplished
without a casualty, although Platoons had some narrow escapes. We were
singularly lucky that way; we were always hearing that such and such a
Battalion had had a Platoon blown to bits in the Square, but it never
happened to us; if an Officer lost men by taking a known dangerous
road when a safer was available, it was not counted unto him for
righteousness!

On the 8th the enemy shelled us all day, especially BEEK TRENCH
and BATTALION HEADQUARTERS, and six men were wounded; the 9th was
quieter--one man wounded.

On the 10th, after a quiet morning, our artillery bombarded enemy lines
opposite B Company, who had their Company Headquarters blown in in the
retaliation which followed--no casualty.

After a quiet day on the 11th, the Battalion was relieved on the 12th,
except A Company, by the 1/4th KING’S OWN, A Company being left behind
to do a special job--wiring in close support and support lines--the
rest going back to YPRES, whence they provided the usual nightly
working parties till the 16th, when they were relieved by the 12th
ROYAL SUSSEX REGIMENT and marched to P Camp north of POPERINGHE. The
next day we marched to ROUSSEL FARM, about a mile east of ELVERDINGHE,
the Drums, recently re-formed, playing on the march for the first time.
A Company turned up, dead beat, at 5 a.m. Second Lieutenant Faber
went sick from sheer overwork; as Lewis gun Officer he had tried to
do everything himself and broke down. We were sorry to lose such an
excellent Officer.

During the next few days, except when snowed off, a party of nine
Officers and 300 Other Ranks, under Captain Houghton, was employed
daily in making the formation for doubling a railway track, supervised
by an R.E. Officer. As our party included a Civil Engineer, a Railway
Engineer, and a Municipal Engineer, there was enough technical skill
to have laid the whole railway! During this period another party, D
Company under Captain Matthew, were repairing dugouts in CANAL BANK,
YPRES, and after the first day were billeted there to save marching.

On the 22nd Captain Harris returned to the Battalion and took over the
Bombing Company, an experimental organisation which did valuable work
during its short existence. We were glad to leave this place with its
thin huts (the weather was bitter) and march to D Camp on the 23rd,
where, on the 24th, we were inspected by the Army Commander, General
Sir Herbert Plumer.

On the 1st February our shooting team were winners in the
inter-Battalion competition and were chosen to represent the Brigade.
On the 3rd we were relieved in D Camp by the 1/5th NORTH LANCASHIRE
REGIMENT, marched to POPERINGHE, and trained to BOLLEZEELE.

The train was a sort of miniature affair, and the railway ran, mostly
by the roadside, at about three miles an hour. What a treat it was to
get out of the sound of the guns for a bit, and to be in a pleasant
little Flemish town, outwardly untouched by war! It consisted of a
cheerful-looking market square lined with small shops, with a Church
in the middle--quite a treat to see a Church untouched by shells--with
a sort of openwork spire, to let out the sound of the carillons which
played every hour and half-hour; how sweetly and peacefully it floated
out over the open country on a still, frosty night! There was also
a good inn, the “Lion d’Or,” known as the “Brass Cat!” The men were
mostly billeted in enormous barns; the Officers in houses round the
square. Here, it was rumoured, we were to have a month’s rest, but no
one believed it; we actually _got_ 16 days.

On the 4th, being Sunday, of course orders for an immediate move were
received at 11 30 a.m., and the Battalion packed up and concentrated
at 2 15 p.m. and marched to ESQUELBECQ, a distance of five miles;
this march will long be remembered by the Lewis gunners, who had to
carry their guns there and back again--for this turned out to be a
“camouflage” march; much hostile aerial activity had recently been
displayed in the back areas, so large columns of troops were made to
march eastwards during the day and back at dusk.

It was bitterly cold, snow on the ground and freezing hard--this
weather continued all the time we were there. The time was devoted to
training--Company, Battalion, and Brigade schemes, and in the intervals
we smartened up and overhauled our interior economy.

On the 16th we moved back to C Camp, where we relieved the 14th
Hampshires.

On 17th February, 1917, we sent an Officer and 20 men to attend
an investiture of French soldiers by the Army Commander, as
representatives of the 55th Division--rather a compliment.

On the 18th the Brigadier presented Military Medal ribbons to Company
Sergeant-Major Heywood, Corporal Bamber, and 1147 Private Ainscough,
T. On the 24th we moved into billets in CANAL BANK, YPRES. These
were large elephant dugouts on the bank of the canal north of YPRES,
comfortable and fairly safe, but we were only there for a night,
relieving the 1/5th South Lancashires in the LA BRIQUE sector the next
night. This was a rotten sector, badly neglected by previous Divisions;
even the main communication trench was about two feet deep in water
when we first saw it, and BILGE TRENCH well deserved its unsavoury
name. It is only fair to say that when we left it it was fairly
comfortable. On the 26th the line was rearranged, and we returned to
CANAL BANK, whence we sent up the usual nightly working parties.

On the 4th March YPRES was heavily shelled during the day, but we
relieved the 1/4th King’s Own in the line in the evening without
casualties; at 7 5 p.m. the enemy sprung a mine on our right Brigade
front and our artillery opened a heavy bombardment; one man was wounded
in YPRES.

The 5th was a quiet day; at night a patrol went to examine CANADIAN
DUGOUTS in the middle of NO MAN’S LAND and found them occupied.

On the 8th we were relieved by the 1/4th KING’S OWN and went back to
CANAL BANK, where some artist did the Regimental Crest in bits of tile
in front of a dugout. One wonders if it is still there!

On the 13th we sent a strong fighting patrol up the line to raid two of
the CANADIAN DUGOUTS. The party consisted of one Officer, one N.C.O.,
and 12 men, who constituted the dugout party, and two complete Lewis
gun teams.

Presumably the Hun got wind of the enterprise--he always did--for Nos.
1, 2, and 3 dugouts were empty and the wire round them destroyed. That
evening we relieved the King’s Own again. On the 15th YPRES was shelled
throughout the day, and again the following day; a patrol of ours had a
scrap with a Hun patrol in NO MAN’S LAND, but suffered no casualties.

The 17th was a quiet day; the Battalion was relieved by the 1/5th
KING’S OWN and went back to C Camp, where we remained till the
28th. During this period important reorganisation was carried out,
the bombing sections rejoining their Companies, thus “washing out”
the Bombing Company, the Lewis guns being placed finally under
Company Commanders; Companies reorganised their Platoons into four
sections--one of bombers, one of riflemen, one of Lewis gunners, and
one of rifle grenadiers. As a matter of fact we had ourselves suggested
and partially adopted this about a month before, but it was now
officially sanctioned. Second Lieutenant H. Lonsdale joined us during
this period.

On the 28th we moved back to CANAL BANK, YPRES; on that day we made 272
barbed wire concertinas and carried 100 up the line. We remained here a
few days, supplying nightly working parties--chiefly carrying wire up
to the front line; two men were wounded on the 1st April.

During February and March we lost 98 men through sickness alone--our
monthly average being between 40 and 60 during the following months
also.

On the 2nd April we relieved the 1/4th KING’S OWN in the LA BRIQUE
sector without casualties; Second Lieutenant Fullerton joined us. The
next day was quiet, with slight shelling on the front line, but on
the following night a patrol of ours ran into a strong enemy party,
who tried to cut them off, but a Lewis gun team being sent for, they
thought better of it and retired, covered by two machine guns; we had
three killed and one wounded that day.

On the 6th we had a man wounded, and again on the 7th; on the latter
day the 165th Brigade on our right carried out a hurricane bombardment
on the enemy’s front line with Stokes’ mortars. The enemy sent up red
flares, which, being our S.O.S. signal, brought our artillery into
action, and 600 shells were fired on the enemy front line opposite us.
Our relief that night by the 1/4th KING’S OWN was carried out, with one
casualty, in bright moonlight, and we went back to CANAL BANK.

The 8th, Easter Sunday, was a lovely day, and very quiet. The Padre
held four Communion services in one of the dugouts, and a large number
of us went.

The next few days we spent in doing a certain amount of training on
the Canal Bank, with nightly working parties; on the 12th Second
Lieutenant R. A. Hall was accidentally wounded in the arm during
bombing practice; the same evening we relieved the 1/4th KING’S OWN in
LA BRIQUE sub-sector.

On the 13th, during some slight shelling, a Lewis gun post on our right
Company front had the misfortune to get hit, one man being killed and
three others wounded, and on the following day, though “quiet,” two
more men were wounded. On the 17th we sent out a large fighting patrol,
with Bangalore torpedoes, to capture an enemy sentry post in a sap
head, but, as usual, “when they got there the cupboard was bare,” and
they came away empty.

On the 17th we were relieved by the 12th ROYAL SUSSEX (39th
Division)--the relief was not complete till 1 30 a.m.--and we entrained
at YPRES at 2 30 a.m. and arrived at POPERINGHE station at 3 25 a.m.
and marched to Z Camp, where we snatched a few hours’ sleep. At 2 30
p.m. we marched via WATOU to HOUTKERQUE, where Companies were billeted
in scattered farms; here our Medical Officer, Captain A. W. Uloth,
R.A.M.C., went sick, and Captain R. W. Shegog, R.A.M.C., came in his
place. Here we remained for three days, cleaning up and training, till
on the 22nd the whole Brigade concentrated at 9 a.m. one mile south
of HERZEELE and marched, with first line transport, to billets in
ARNEKE, where we arrived at 1 45 p.m., leaving again early next morning
to concentrate at 9 a.m. four and a half miles west of ARNEKE, and
march via WATTEN (locally known as “WAT”) to HOULLE, where we arrived
at 2 p.m. These marches, though a stiff trial to men fresh from the
trenches, with slack muscles and tender feet, were interesting; we were
seeing new country: HOUTKERQUE and HERZEELE were nice little towns,
though the latter had more troops than it could properly hold; ARNEKE
was still better--the people, who seemed delighted to see us, had a
curiously English look, probably due to the fact that Marlborough’s
troops were once billeted all round this part; just as the Scotch blood
in Lancashire is traced to the presence of the Pretender’s following.
HOULLE is in the midst of the hilly country near ST. OMER--strongly
reminding one of parts of Kent--an ideal country to train in. Here were
large ranges, like the Aldershot Ranges, for musketry, and every day
we marched out of billets and up on to the hills for training of some
kind, taking our cookers with us and having dinners up there, every
day getting fitter and improving in morale--shaking off the trench
staleness and thinking more of open fighting--getting more of the
“offensive spirit.” Second Lieutenant Hall rejoined us on the 26th. The
Diarist writes at this time: “Still in the same place”--that in itself,
you see, is sufficiently remarkable to be chronicled. “There are real
hedgerows here, just bursting into leaf, and the fritillaries are out
all along the lanes, in fact I am in the middle of real Spring. A lilac
in front of my window shows half out, covered with bloom, and the
currants are quite green. All this makes one long more than ever for
England. The people round here are much better farmers and gardeners
than we are--nothing is wasted, and everything done thoroughly and
carefully. As I look out of the window a thrush is singing and the view
is an English view. Oh, to be in England now that April’s here!”

30th. “The cuckoo is at it and the nightingale, in fact it is Spring,
cloudless day, glorious sun, everything as it should be, only one thing
wrong, I’m not where I ought to be, in England--Spring in a foreign
land is a painful pleasure to an Englishman.” The point of these
extracts is that they express what each of us felt at that time--and
many other times--an intense longing, carefully smothered, for Home and
Peace; few individuals, if any, went abroad, or stayed there, because
they _liked_ it.

Until the 6th we remained at HOULLE training; it would serve no useful
purpose and would bore the general reader to set down the programme
of training carried out; enough to say that it was a fresh and merry
column that marched back to ARNEKE on the 6th of May, leaving again by
train at 11 45 a.m. for POPERINGHE. Here we were met by the Divisional
Band, which played us to L Camp, where we spent the night, returning to
POPERINGHE the next morning and up by train to the PRISON billets at
YPRES.

During the next five days bathing was carried out, and the usual
nightly working parties went up the line. YPRES was distinctly livelier
than before, but only one man was wounded during the period.

On the 14th we relieved the 1/4th KING’S OWN in the right sub-sector,
POTIJZE. The sectors had been rearranged. D Company had two Platoons in
the front line and two in close support; A Company was in reserve and
held MILL COTTS, GARDEN OF EDEN, PROWSE TRENCH, and ST. JAMES’ TRENCH.
B and C Companies, in Brigade Reserve, were billeted in houses on the
POTIJZE ROAD.

On the 18th the enemy was very active with his artillery, the front
line Company, D, calling for retaliation five times during the morning;
we had one man killed and one wounded. A fighting patrol had gone out
the previous night to try to capture an enemy party, and were supported
by an artillery barrage--as usual, the enemy had withdrawn.

At 9 15 that evening the enemy placed a shrapnel, trench mortar, and
howitzer barrage on our front line first, then on our support line, and
an S.O.S. being sent up by the Battalion on our left was repeated by
us; as soon as the barrage started our front Company stood to and fired
rapid over the parapet. No one in the front line saw the enemy leave
his trenches, but two snipers, who had been out in NO MAN’S LAND all
day and were waiting for it to get dark to come in, saw the enemy place
a machine gun on his parapet, the team of which they proceeded to knock
out; they also saw Huns entering the trenches of the Battalion on our
left. Our trenches were badly damaged in places, one man was killed,
one missing, and Second Lieutenant Francis and four men wounded; B
Company relieved D that evening.

“It is curious to notice the different effects intermittent and
concentrated shelling have on one--intermittent shelling takes people
different ways--on the whole it makes you angry; concentrated shelling,
such as a barrage, you rise above altogether by some curious effort of
will. I think it is that in the first case one hears each one coming
hissing along in a descending scale, and speculates where it will fall,
while in the second there is simply a terrific medley of bangs and
crashes which you can only accept as a perfect inferno of noise, and
leave it at that.”

  [Illustration: Aeroplane Photo of Opposing Trench Lines, YPRES.]

The following night we hit back; Major Crump, who was in command in the
absence of Lieutenant-Colonel Hindle, who was commanding the Brigade,
organised a raid, carried out under an artillery barrage by Second
Lieutenant Tautz, three N.C.O.’s, and 20 men, who entered the enemy’s
lines and bombed dugouts. The party had great difficulty in getting
through the wire, and our casualties were two men wounded of the party
and one in the trench; three of the raiders were at first reported
missing, but Private Metcalfe turned up at dawn, having got entangled
in the wire and badly wounded, and in the evening another, Private
Cooper, came in, having spent the day in a shell hole.

That day, the 20th, leave reopened, having been closed since January,
and everyone began to calculate their chances.

About this time we were encouraged to use our Lewis guns against
hostile aircraft, and special mountings and fittings were issued to
us for that purpose--it was impossible for people behind to deal with
machines flying low over our front line. This aeroplane shooting was
rather good sport, and though very few were actually brought down by
Lewis gun fire, they soon learned to keep out of range. At this time
the aeroplane activity in the SALIENT was great on both sides--on a
fine day machines swarmed like midges in the sky.

On the night of the 20th we were relieved by the 1/4th KING’S OWN,
and on relief we marched to A Camp, just behind VLAMERTINGHE, leaving
Captain Harris and 200 men of B and D Companies in YPRES as a working
party. They had rather a lively time, as YPRES was being heavily
shelled daily--a shell actually entered a cellar where several men were
sleeping, ricochetted and buried itself in one of the walls without
exploding or touching anyone. During the next few days five men were
wounded.

On the night of the 26th we relieved the 1/4th KING’S OWN in the
POTIJZE sector, C and A Companies in front, B in support, and D in
reserve, and began at once a series of works designed to mislead the
enemy and make him think an attack was intended on our front. How much
he was deceived appeared from the amount of attention we received from
this time onward until the battle of MESSINES.

The opposing sides gained much of their knowledge of the other’s
intentions from aeroplane photographs, which show up with great
clearness any newly-dug earth. It was our task then to open up all the
disused trenches on our sector, placing along the top a row of new
sandbags, and to dig saps out into NO MAN’S LAND, at the same time
annoying the Hun by every means in our power. Two were killed and three
wounded during the next four days, during which we kept throwing things
at the Hun--trench mortars, grenades, bullets, etc.--and we really did
stir him up. Then came the news that we were not to be relieved, so
Companies changed over.

On 1st June the gas strafe started; our people started it with a
discharge of 500 gas drums on enemy reserves. We heard afterwards that
so sudden and concentrated was the attack that a whole Company were
poisoned where they stood. The enemy retaliated on us, killing one man
and wounding three, using everything he had; then he began to bring up
gas shells and use them, chiefly at night on lines of communication.
The sighing of gas shells going over never ceased during three
successive nights before the show, yet the damage done was very slight.
But the Companies in the trenches kept getting odd ones, and the
veering breeze kept clouds of various gases drifting about for quite a
long time, and we had a few anxious vigils. The Hun was very angry and
horribly afraid and therefore shelled everything he could think of, and
we appeared to occupy some of his thoughts, for we certainly got our
full share and he took his toll of us.

On the 2nd we sent over more gas drums, and again the Hun retaliated,
doing a lot of damage to trenches and killing two men and wounding five
others.

On the 3rd we treated him to a combined smoke, artillery, and machine
gun barrage, and he replied, but more feebly, killing one man and
wounding two; but during the night, from 10 p.m. to 4 a.m., he drenched
YPRES with gas shells, our transport suffering slightly. He also, on
the following day, put 67 “Minnies” on to B Company, killing one man
and wounding Second Lieutenants Hall and Johnson and 11 others. We
were glad to learn that Lieutenant-Colonel Hindle had been awarded the
D.S.O. in the Birthday Honours List.

That night a minor enterprise by the 1/5th NORTH LANCASHIRE REGIMENT
on our right caused some shelling on our right front Company, and a
party digging saps in front escaped by a miracle; he also sent a few
Granatenwerfer over into the middle of another party engaged in sap
digging, causing several casualties, the total being 14 wounded for
the two days. On the 14th both sides were active. We were preparing
an elaborate programme of smoke and other bombs, to be discharged at
the same hour as the MESSINES battle was timed to start, also putting
scaling ladders against the parapet--this work was under Captain
Harris. The Hun shelled YPRES pretty heavily in the evening, and set
two large dumps on fire.

At 3 10 a.m. on the 7th the Messines battle started with a literal
earthquake--19 mines being blown up at once, the barrage starting at
the same time on our front among others. The enemy shelled us for about
half an hour, by which time he found out that we were bluffing him and
stopped. Our casualties were five killed, Second Lieutenant Agostini
and 10 others wounded.

On the 8th the enemy shelled the roads with 5.9’s and gas shells in the
early morning, our guns doing wire cutting with the 106 fuse, a very
sensitive fuse which bursts on graze without burying itself; a good
many “shorts” fell on our trenches due to defective ammunition, which
was just as dangerous to the gunners as to us, as muzzle-bursts were
not infrequent. A gunner Officer going round the line was at a loss for
words when he saw a shell case, which had fallen short, stuck up over
a dugout with the inscription, “A present from the R.F.A.!” Sergeant
Thompson was killed by a nosecap from one of these “shorts,” and
during the day four men were wounded.

  [Illustration: Oblique Aeroplane Photograph Showing Trench Lines at
  YPRES. Taken April 23rd, 1917.]

In the afternoon A and C Companies relieved B and D in the front line.

At 11 9 p.m. the 39th Division on our left sent over gas from
Projectors; we caught some of the retaliation on POTIJZE ROAD--5.9’s
and gas shells.

On the 9th we had a fairly quiet morning, but the artillery livened up
in the afternoon; the 1/4th KING’S OWN carried out a successful raid
on our front, bagging six unwounded prisoners, who seemed glad to be
taken. The enemy was taken by surprise in mid-relief. We had six men
wounded during the day.

Things remained lively during the next two days, five men being
wounded, but on the 11th the blessed word “Relief” was whispered.
Imagine the joy of men who had never had their clothes off for nearly
three weeks--more, in some cases. The relieving Battalion, the 1/9th
King’s Liverpool Regiment, did not arrive till after 3 a.m., so relief
had to be carried out in daylight in very small parties, but it went
off without a casualty, and we marched to a canvas camp behind YPRES,
where we rested till noon on the 12th, when we marched by Companies to
POPERINGHE, leaving by train at 2 45 p.m. and reaching ESQUELBECQ at 4
45 p.m.; here we were joined by part of the transport, and after dinner
had been eaten we marched on to BOLLEZEELE, where we occupied our old
billets.

The next three days were spent in cleaning up, bathing, and a little
training.

On the 16th the Brigade marched via Watten to BOISDINGHEM; it was a
broiling day and the sky was like brass, and as the march started
at 9 a.m., when the sun was high up, and was mostly uphill, a large
number of men were affected with sunstroke and fell out, but the
9th Wing R.F.C. were very good to us and lent us lurries to bring
in the stragglers. Here we found the accommodation poor and totally
inadequate, but we crowded in somehow, many preferring to bivouac in
the open fields rather than occupy the buildings allotted to them:
the village lay on the top of the downs not many miles from our old
area HOULLE, almost out of the sound of the guns. About this time the
Diarist, reviewing recent events, writes:--

“To be within two or three yards of a big shell when it bursts sounds
like sudden death, but it isn’t--necessarily; it happens daily to lots
of people who survive; I have been several times as close as that,
closer in one case; the shock and noise absolutely deafen one for some
minutes afterwards, but it seems to pass off; but there must be a good
solid bulwark of earth between you and the shell! if there isn’t,
well--shell-shock is the best you can hope for!”

On Sunday, the 17th, we had a Church of England parade out of doors,
the cornet player of the Drums leading the hymns. Second Lieutenants
Easterby and Rigby joined us. The following day we were inspected in
mass by the Brigadier, who gave us a good rating about Saturday’s
march. We thought this a little unkind, as it might have occurred to
the Staff to make a start early in the morning and get it over in the
cool of the day, instead of expecting men who were weak from a long
spell of trenches to march 15 miles heavily laden in the middle of a
hot June day; however, we had no doubt that those responsible would be
duly ticked off, so we swallowed the rating with outward calm; after
all, the men who fell out had in some cases done so without asking
leave, being long past caring what happened, and this was a breach of
march discipline.

The remaining days of the month were spent in training; we received a
large number of reinforcements, including Second Lieutenant Brooke.
Captain Houghton, who had picked up trench fever during the last tour,
was sent to Field Ambulance, Captain Harris taking over A Company.

On the 2nd July we marched to LUMBRES, thence we went by rail to
BRANDHOEK, and marched from there to DERBY CAMP. At dusk D Company
moved forward to a post called L 4 on the YPRES Road, A and C Companies
to a strong point called P 1, and two Officers and 50 Other Ranks to
YPRES for water duties. Second Lieutenant H. Whitehurst joined us as
a reinforcement. Two men were wounded on the 3rd and one on the 5th,
on which day Captain Ord rejoined us from the Divisional School, Major
Crump leaving the following day for a three months’ course at the
Senior Officers’ School, Aldershot.

On the 9th we relieved the 1/4th KING’S OWN in the line; there was
considerable enemy activity during the night, and we had one killed and
one wounded.

On the 10th, although considered “quiet,” we had three men wounded,
while on the 12th, though he put two of our Lewis guns out of action
with Minenwerfers and shelled our trenches intensely, we had no
casualty. At 11 p.m. he began to shell Battalion Headquarters steadily
and went on till 8 30 a.m.; a wiring party from our left front Company
had three men wounded by “Minnies,” and had to come in.

One man was killed and eight wounded during the day, one of the wiring
party being missing. On the 13th two men were wounded during desultory
shelling of our lines, and five on the next day, which started quiet,
but things on both sides woke up at dusk, our guns bombarding enemy
batteries, the Hun sending gas shells on to us, and barraging the front
line, stopping all work, wounding three men and gassing two others
that day. In the early morning 20 yards of the front line parapet was
knocked in, one man killed and five wounded. Things were getting very
hot indeed, and our strength was daily being whittled down, but relief
was not yet.

The casualties at this time would have been far heavier than they
actually were but for the fact that the N.C.O.’s in the front line had
learnt that NO MAN’S LAND was the safest place in a bombardment and
used to take their posts out in front of our wire as soon as the Hun
opened out.

  [Illustration: Oblique Aeroplane Photograph Showing Objectives in the
  3rd Battle of YPRES.]




                              CHAPTER VI.

                      THE THIRD BATTLE OF YPRES.

                 15th July, 1917, to 1st August, 1917.


On the 17th July, 1917, the preliminary bombardment of the enemy lines
by our guns commenced. In the early morning ten shells from a Hun high
velocity gun landed on Battalion Headquarters, one actually entering
the Colonel’s dugout and exploding there without injuring him!

On the night following, a fighting patrol of ours had a brush with a
Hun patrol in NO MAN’S LAND, and did good work, bringing back a dead
German, who turned out to belong to the 449th Infantry Regiment, who
were expected to be opposite to us. On the 20th Second Lieutenant
Vincent took a raiding party of 20 in to the enemy lines and found a
post of four men; two fled, one was bayonetted, and one taken prisoner.
During these days artillery had been active, and our casualties were 6
killed, 13 wounded, 2 gassed.

On the 21st we suffered rather heavily from enemy artillery, a single
shell hitting 9 men, our total casualties on that day being 11 killed
and 14 wounded, of whom 2 afterwards died--our worst day since the
SOMME. The Quartermaster, Lieutenant March, was wounded but remained
on duty. In the evening we were relieved by the 1/5th King’s Liverpool
Regiment, and went back to a canvas camp near POPERINGHE, where all had
a bath, and then marched on to WATOU, resting there for three days and
returning to the canvas camp on the 25th. Captain L. Duckworth rejoined
us here, and Second Lieutenant Holmes reported for duty.

During the night of the 27th enemy aeroplanes dropped bombs near our
camp.

The following Operation Order and the details of the attack are
taken verbatim from the War Diary, the official record, and are
very complete, but a few prefatory words are necessary to make them
intelligible to the general reader.

The 55th Division was at this time in the 19th Corps of the 5th Army,
which, with the 2nd Army and the 1st French Army, were to attack the
enemy’s GHELUVELT-LANGEMARCK line; the task allotted to our Brigade
(164), was to pass through the other two Brigades of the Division when
they had taken their objectives and capture the third-line system,
mostly consisting of concrete blockhouses, which we were to meet for
the first time.

The barrage is officially stated to have been the most intense which
had ever been put down up to that time, and largely contributed to the
success of the attack. Another novelty for us was “B team,” a nucleus
of Officers, Warrant Officers, N.C.O.’s and men who were kept out of
the attack so that the Battalion could be reorganised as quickly as
possible afterwards; the Order had been issued by the Higher Command
some months before, and to it was largely due the wonderful speed with
which units recovered from battles which in earlier years would have
taken nearly all their leaders and specialists and rendered them unfit
for action for at least six months.

The following Officers actually went up with the Battalion for the
battle, the remainder being on B team. Of those that went up, only the
Commanding Officer, Adjutant, Transport Officer, and Second Lieutenant
Higson came through unwounded.

    Lieutenant-Colonel R. Hindle  Commanding.
    Captain Ord                   Second in Command.
    Captain Shegog, R.A.M.C.      Medical Officer.
    Captain Caley                 Chaplain.
    Lieutenant Buckmaster         Adjutant.
    Second Lieutenant Ashcroft    Signalling Officer.
    Second Lieutenant Williams    Intelligence Officer.
    Second Lieutenant Bardsley    Transport Officer.

    Captain A. L. Harris          }
    Second Lieutenant Ordish      } A Company.
    Second Lieutenant Tyldesley   }
    Second Lieutenant Macsweeny   }

    Lieutenant Ogden              }
    Second Lieutenant Vincent     } B Company.
    Second Lieutenant Easterby    }
    Second Lieutenant Rigby       }

    Captain Hore                  }
    Second Lieutenant Higson      } C Company.
    Second Lieutenant Mather      }

    Lieutenant Ostrehan           }
    Second Lieutenant Fullerton   } D Company.
    Second Lieutenant Holden      }

The aeroplane photograph read in conjunction with the map will help
to give the reader some idea of the country as it actually was, for
though July as a whole had been fine, there was a heavy thunderstorm
on the 29th, which turned the tracks and roads into morasses and
filled the shell holes with water. “The succeeding days were dull and
heavy, making the completion of the artillery preparation peculiarly
difficult, and typical Flanders weather prevailed on the morning of the
31st--the moment chosen for the attack.

“Low-lying clouds which made aerial observation and co-operation as
difficult as could be imagined; a dampness of atmosphere, threatening
rain at any moment; a half-sodden ground, greasy and depressing--such
was the luck of the weather when the barrage opened.”[H]

The Operation Order for the attack is set out below practically in
full. It is impossible to summarize it without losing some detail which
may be of interest to readers.

  [Illustration]

THE OPERATION ORDER.

1. On Z Day, the 55th Division will take part in a general attack.

   Battalion on the right--6th Cameron Highlanders.

   Battalion on the left--2/5th Lancashire Fusiliers.

   165th Brigade will capture the FREZENBERG line before the
   advance of the 164th Brigade begins.

   Brigade support--1/8th Liverpool Regiment, who will, after the
   capture of final objectives, consolidate the general line K of
   KEIR FARM--SCHULER FARM.

   Brigade reserve--1/4th Royal Lancaster Regiment, who will,
   after the capture of final objectives, consolidate the general
   line GALLIPOLI--SOMME--HINDU COT.

2. At ZERO plus 4hrs. 40mins. the Battalion will advance in artillery
formation from the position of assembly and deploy as necessary, at the
discretion of the Platoon Commanders, before crossing the Black Line.

The attack will then be made behind a creeping barrage, in four waves.

The BLACK DOTTED LINE will be captured and held as an outpost line, the
GREEN LINE being consolidated.

3. Distribution and Formation for Attack.

    Right Front Company        D.
    Left Front Company         A.
    Right Support Company      C.
    Left Support Company       B.

Between Assembly Line and Black Line, the formation will be four lines
of Platoons in file or fours, at 50 yards’ distance.

After crossing the Black Line the formation will be four waves at 50
yards’ distance.

The second wave will close up to the first, and the third wave to
the second, before the first and second waves reach their respective
objectives.

4. Machine Guns.

One sub-section will move in rear of each supporting Company. They
will occupy the outpost line, one gun being placed in each of the four
strong points that will be constructed, upon receiving orders from the
O.C. Battalion.

5. Objectives of Waves and Commanders.

The first wave will capture the line of trenches D 20 a 33 90--D 14 a
10 20 and all buildings north-west of KANSAS CROSS within the Battalion
boundary and on the south-west side of the ZONNEBEKE--WINNIPEG road. A
special party will be told off to bomb forward along the trench leading
towards the Green Line from D 14 c 30 70. This line will be under
command of O.C. D Company.

The second wave will capture the Green Line; this line will be under
the command of O.C. A Company.

Third wave will pass through first and second waves, and will capture
BLACK DOTTED LINE and will be under command of O.C. C Company.

Fourth wave will collect Nos. 4, 5, and 6 mopping-up parties and will
help in the consolidation of the Green Line. This wave will be prepared
to assist the third wave in the capture of its objectives.

6. Consolidation.

The consolidation, which will commence at once, will be carried out in
depth and will take the form of three lines of strong points, namely,
those held by Nos. 1, 2, and 3 waves.

These strong points will ultimately be joined up to form trenches.

One Company of the 1/8th Liverpool Regiment will be available to assist
in digging.

It is essential that artillery shelters for the Garrison should be
constructed before dawn on Z plus 1 day.

Strong points will be constructed at the following places:--

   D 14 d 05 30.--By the second wave, where touch will be gained
   with Battalion on right.

Also at--

    D 14 b 20 05. }
    D 14 a 9 5.   } By the third wave, and touch gained with the
    D 8 c 7 1.    }    Battalion on our left.

One machine gun will move up into each of these strong points as soon
as the ground has been gained and consolidation begins.

7. Battalion Headquarters.

Prior to advance will be in the mined dugout in CONGREVE WALK.

During advance Battalion Headquarters will move between the two rear
Companies.

A temporary headquarters will be established about POMMERN CASTLE.

8. Assembly.

The Battalion, with machine guns, trench mortars, and mopping-up
parties, will occupy CONGREVE WALK between POTIJZE road and LONE
street. Order from right to left:--

    15 Platoon.
       Mopping-up party No. 1.
     9 Platoon.
    16 Platoon.
       Right sub-section machine guns.
    13 Platoon.
    12 Platoon.
       Mopping-up party No. 5.
       Mopping-up party No. 4.
    14 Platoon.
       Trench mortars.
       Battalion Headquarters.
     3 Platoon.
       Mopping-up party No. 2.
     6 Platoon.
     1 Platoon.
       Left sub-section machine guns.
     7 Platoon.
     2 Platoon.
     5 Platoon.
       Mopping-up party No. 6.
       Mopping-up party No. 3.
     4 Platoon.

9. Mopping-up Parties.

For during the attack will follow:

    1. Trenches north-west of IBERIA and dugouts at
           D 19 b 10 65                                     15 Platoon.
    2. Gallipoli dugouts and trenches as far west as
           Somme exclusive                                   3 Platoon.
    3. Somme and trenches north-west as far as Battalion
           boundary                                          4 Platoon.
    4. Works at D 14 c 1 2                                  14 Platoon.
    5. Keir Farm                                            14 Platoon.
    6. Buildings 100 yards west of Kansas Cross              4 Platoon.

Parties 1, 2, and 3 will be furnished by 1/4th Royal Lancaster Regiment.

Parties 4 and 5 by C Company 1/4th North Lancashire Regiment.

Party 6 by B Company 1/4th North Lancashire Regiment.

These parties will merge into the waves immediately in front of them
before reaching their objectives.

Parties found by the 1/4th Royal Lancaster Regiment will be absorbed by
their own unit as soon as it reaches them.

Parties found by the 1/4th Loyal North Lancashire Regiment will be
furnished from fourth wave, and upon completion of their task will be
absorbed by that wave as it passes over them.

Each mopping-up party will consist of one Platoon.

10. Trench Mortars.

One sub-section of trench mortars will assemble in CONGREVE WALK, close
to the mined dugouts, and will move near Battalion Headquarters in the
attack, ready to deal with any points of resistance that may hold out.
They will take up position on the line D 14 Central--Toronto Farm,
after all objectives have been taken.

11. Medical.

Aid post prior to advance I 4 a 6 4.

During the advance, the Medical Officer will move in rear of the centre
of the Battalion and will establish an aid post in the vicinity of
POMMERN CASTLE.

12. Communications.

During the advance, communications will be by runner--visual being
established whenever halted. Second Lieutenant ASHCROFT will
establish:--

   1. A Battalion command post, about D 19 a 4 4, and will
   arrange telephonic communication with 164th Brigade office
   near Rat Farm.

   2. An advance command post about Hill 35, and connect up by
   telephone with Brigade forward station, near Somme Farm.

   3. Runner relay post about D 19 a 2 8.

13. Dress and Equipment.

Dress:--Fighting order with packs.

Ammunition:--120 rounds S.A.A on every man except--

    (1) Signallers.
    (2) Scouts.
    (3) Runners.
    (4) Lewis Gunners.
    (5) Bombers.
    (6) Rifle Grenadiers, carrying No. 20 grenades.
    All of whom will carry 50 rounds S.A.A.

In addition, every N.C.O. and man will carry:--

   (1) In the pack.--Towel and soap, spare oil tin, holdall,
   rations (see para. 14), extra water bottle (containing cold
   tea without sugar or milk), groundsheet, and mess tin.

   (2) In each top pocket of the jacket.--One No. 23 rifle
   grenade complete with rod and cartridge (except Rifle
   Grenadiers carrying No. 20 grenades).

   (3) In each bottom pocket of the jacket.--One aeroplane flare.

   (4) Under the braces of the pack.--Three sandbags.

In addition to the above--

   (a) Each bomber will carry eight No. 23 grenades in bomb
   buckets.

   (b) Sixteen extra pairs wirecutters will be issued to each
   Company and will be equally distributed amongst Platoons.

   (c) S.O.S. signals will be issued at the rate of five per
   Company.

   (d) All Rifle Grenadiers wearing grenade carriers will carry
   six No. 20 grenades. These will not be detonated until the
   Battalion arrives at CONGREVE WALK.

   Rifle Grenadiers will carry their 50 rounds of ammunition in a
   bandolier and will discard their S.A.A. pouches.

   Orders re carrying of heavy tools will be issued later.

   Men carrying heavy tools will not carry entrenching tool.

All the stores mentioned above will be issued in the concentration area
on X/Y night.

14. Supply.

(a) Rations.

   (1) Rations for consumption on Z day will be delivered to
   Companies from Quartermaster’s Stores on X day.

   (2) Rations for Z plus 1 day will be drawn at the
   concentration area on the night X/Y.

   (3) Rations for Z plus 2 day will be at the Brigade Dump,
   near junction of Milner Trench and Congreve Walk, and will
   ultimately be brought forward by pack transport.

Scale of rations for Z, Z plus 1 and Z plus 2 day will be as follows:--

    Preserved Meat         1lb.
    Biscuits               1lb.
    Sugar                  2oz.
    Tea                    5-8oz.
    Jam                    3oz.
    Solidified Alcohol     One 8oz. tin for eight men.

(b) Water.

   800 gallons of water will be held in reservoirs for 164
   Brigade on the line Liverpool Trench--Congreve Walk, and water
   bottles will be filled from this source on Y/Z night.

   On Z day, 800 gallons of water for the Brigade will be sent
   forward in petrol tins for use on Z plus 1 day.

15. Dumps.

Brigade dumps will be formed as follows:--

Advanced dump on road at about D 13 c 1 8.

Right Forward dump--GALLIPOLI.

The advanced dump will be formed and maintained by transport with the
following stores:--

    S.A.A.
    Lewis gun drums.
    No. 23 grenades.
    No. 20 grenades.
    Flares.
    Blank Cartridges.
    Verey Lights.

1/4th Royal Lancaster Regiment will be responsible for carrying from
the advanced dump to the forward dump and will provide one Platoon for
carrying from the forward dump to Companies.


EXTRACTED FROM WAR DIARY.


POPERINGHE.

28th July. Announced to be W day in connection with forthcoming
operations. Bombs again dropped during night fairly near our camp.

Second Lieutenant W. Young and three Other Ranks to Field Ambulance
sick.

29th July. X day in connection with forthcoming operations.
Preparations made for moving into concentration area. At 9 p.m. the
Battalion (less party of 100 Other Ranks and seven Officers who were
being left out of the attack) marched off from camp by Platoons at
300 yards’ distance. There was comparatively little shelling, and
the concentration area was reached (H 10 c) without casualties. It
consisted of camouflaged trenches and bivouac sheets erected under
hedges. Battalion Headquarters was established in a ruined farm with
a siege battery of R.G.A. at 2 30 a.m. The Battalion was fitted out
with rations for Y, Z, and Z plus 1 days, bombs, wirecutters, aeroplane
flares, S.O.S. signals, sandbags, etc.


VLAMERTINGHE.

30th July. Y day. Strict orders had been issued with regard to
restricting movement, so as to preclude the possibility of the
concentration being made known to the enemy. As a matter of fact, it
was a very dull day, and visibility was never even fair. During the
late afternoon, the Brigadier and Divisional Commander visited the
Battalion and wished us good luck. At 9 25 p.m., in drizzling rain, the
first Platoon moved off towards the trenches, followed by the remaining
Platoons at intervals of 200 yards. The mopping-up parties (three in
number) provided for our Battalion by 1/4th Royal Lancaster Regiment
moved with us into such positions as to arrive in their correct
position of assembly.

30th July. The route taken was the main VLAMERTINGHE--YPRES road to
the WATER TOWER I 7 c 85 95, thence by tramline to where it joined
No. 5 track, running parallel and in between the YPRES--POTIJZE road
and YPRES--ST. JEAN road, joining CONGREVE WALK, our assembly trench,
at about I 4 a 45 90. On arrival here, Battalion Headquarters was
established in the mined dugout at the VINERY I 4 a 65 80. CONGREVE
WALK was reached without a casualty, not a shell being fired during the
whole time the Battalion was on the roads and tracks. Our artillery
was very active, raining gas shells on the enemy continuously for four
hours from about 10 p.m. to 2 a.m. At one time--about 11 30 p.m.--the
enemy sent a few mustard-gas shells, in the vicinity of CONGREVE WALK,
causing momentary sneezing and a temporary cessation of the work of
drawing tools. After tools had been drawn there was nothing further to
do except have hot tea--two cookers being concealed near ST. JEAN with
this end in view.

Two Other Ranks wounded.

31st July. Z day. At ZERO hour (3 50 a.m.) the 55th Division assaulted,
taking part in a general attack of the 5th Army, part of the 2nd Army,
and the 1st French Army.

At ZERO the 165th and 166th Infantry Brigades attacked and captured
the Blue Line. The artillery barrage commenced at ZERO. It did not
provoke any reply in the neighbourhood of CONGREVE WALK until about 4
15 a.m., when a few 4.2’s and 5.9’s fell in the trench and caused a
few casualties. From 4 30 a.m. onwards, German prisoners came past
in continuous streams, in many cases being utilised to carry down our
wounded. From the Blue Line the 165th and 166th Brigades moved on to
the Black Line; the artillery provided a protective barrage to cover
consolidation. At ZERO plus 4 hours 40 minutes, the 164th Infantry
Brigade moved off in artillery formation from CONGREVE WALK, 1/4th
Loyal North Lancashires on the right, with 1/4th Royal Lancaster
Regiment in support and 2/5th Lancashire Fusiliers on the left with
1/8th (Irish) Liverpools in support.

Second Lieutenant Ashcroft (Signalling Officer) was killed by a nosecap
as we started off, otherwise everything went off satisfactorily.
The enemy were dropping shells, both high-explosive and shrapnel,
promiscuously between CONGREVE WALK and our original front line, but
there was no difficulty in eluding the areas to which attention was
being paid. It was a dull misty morning, and so there were neither
aeroplanes nor balloons in the air to detect the advancing troops. As
we passed over NO MAN’S LAND, Companies were well shaken out into their
various squares and the direction was being well kept. The enemy wire
in front of his first line system was practically non-existent and
provided no obstacle. The trenches appeared very badly smashed in and
in places obliterated, though here and there appeared small concrete
dugouts apparently still intact.

The advance continued to go well, and the Platoon Commanders with the
help of their compasses maintained their direction. The enemy were
apparently pre-occupied finding out exactly where their own infantry
were and also in moving back some of their guns. Consequently, we
were very little troubled by shells, but machine gun fire caused us
considerable annoyance. It was mostly coming apparently from our right
flank, perhaps from some strong point which had not been sufficiently
mopped-up. However, although bullets were flying everywhere, the
range had not been correctly estimated, and so we suffered very few
casualties in this way before reaching the Black Line.

At ZERO plus 6hrs. 20mins. (10 10 a.m.) the 164th Infantry Brigade
formed up under the protective barrage, which stood about 200 yards on
the enemy’s side of the Black Line, and moved forward to attack and
consolidate the Green Line. Just before forming up under the barrage,
we were caused a little trouble by some snipers who had apparently been
swept over by the barrage and were lying out in shell holes. From now
onwards the artillery barrage was rather thin, owing to the fact that
it was out of range for some of the guns which had fired during the
initial assault and because it was being provided by batteries who had
moved forward since ZERO to positions in the vicinity of the original
NO MAN’S LAND. When the 1/4th Loyal North Lancashires moved off from
the Black Line, touch had been obtained with the 2/5th Lancashire
Fusiliers on the left and the 6th Cameron Highlanders (45th Infantry
Brigade, 15th Division) on the right. During the subsequent advance
from the Black Line to the Green Line the casualties, which were
particularly heavy amongst Officers, were again principally caused by
machine gun fire. Reports were received from several Officers giving
their location, and those machine guns immediately in our line of
advance were effectively dealt with, but we were still troubled by
guns firing from high ground beyond the Green Line and also by guns
enfilading us from our right flank.

Several strong points had to be dealt with in the course of the
advance, particular mention being made of SOMME FARM, GALLIPOLI, and
KEIR FARM. SOMME FARM provided us with 60 prisoners; it consisted of
several concrete dugouts, one being an aid post, and had evidently been
used as a Battalion Headquarters. There were also concrete dugouts at
KEIR FARM and GALLIPOLI, each of which provided us with prisoners.

The Green Line was reported captured at 11 40 a.m., and consolidation
was at once put in hand. While this was in progress, hostile machine
guns again proved troublesome, especially from NILE FARM. During the
advance to the Green Line six batteries--77mm.--were encountered. The
gunners continued to fire them until our advancing waves were within
about 200-250 yards, and then withdrew. On arrival at the Green Line
difficulty was experienced in husbanding the available resources of
ammunition until a further supply could be brought up. Demands were
received from all parts of the line, but they were unable to be met for
some considerable time, owing to the fact that the pack animals, which
were bringing up supplies, were experiencing difficulties owing to the
unexpected quantity of uncut wire.

Meanwhile, while the GREEN LINE was being energetically consolidated,
the third wave moved on to take the BLACK DOTTED or OUTPOST LINE. This
was established along a line running about 200 yards in front of the
GREEN LINE. Our own barrage appeared to fall a trifle short at this
point, and consequently our line was held up slightly and could not be
established on the intended line. Fifty prisoners were captured and
sent back by the Platoons comprising the outpost line. A message timed
11 41 a.m. stated “enemy in full flight.”

At 12 10 p.m. our protective barrage ceased. Meanwhile the outpost line
was being put into a state of defence by the construction of a series
of strong points, though considerable difficulty was being experienced
in maintaining touch on the left. On the right we appeared to be in
touch, but it was obvious that the right flank Company of the 6th
Camerons was not up to its alignment, and, consequently, their line was
swung back.

The difficulties about ammunition continued to increase. Many Lewis
guns were used until every round had been expended, but there was
still none available for issue at Battalion Headquarters. Things went
well until 2 30 p.m., when a report was received that the enemy were
forming up for counter-attack in the vicinity of BOETLEER. At 2 35 p.m.
a strong counter-attack developed on the right, and the 6th Camerons
on our right were seen to be withdrawing. This attempt on the part of
the enemy was immediately followed by an attack on our left. With the
enemy advancing on both flanks and closing together in the centre, our
outpost line, seriously weakened, particularly on the left, withdrew,
and was absorbed into the GREEN LINE. This line in turn then had to
withdraw as there was no touch on the right, and the 2/5th Lancashire
Fusiliers had had to fall back well behind the GREEN LINE owing to the
GREEN LINE not having been taken by the Divisions on their left.

The withdrawal was carried out in perfect order, the troops fighting as
they moved back. By this time our supporting Battalion, the 1/4th Royal
Lancaster Regiment, had merged itself into our line, and the combined
forces of the two Battalions formed a line of resistance just in front
of the BLACK LINE. Posts of Lewis and machine guns were thrown out as
soon as it was dark, and our protective barrage and S.O.S. line was
withdrawn to conform with our new line.

In the evening, about 10 p.m., a warning order was received to the
effect that the Brigade would be relieved by units of the 165th Brigade.

Further general observations will be made under date August 1st.

Casualties during operations on the 31st July.:--

   Officers:--Killed--Captain A. L. Harris (commanding A Company),
                      Second Lieutenant G. Ashcroft (Signals),
                      Second Lieutenant B. H. Williams (Intelligence
                      Officer), Second Lieutenant V. Mather, Second
                      Lieutenant F. Fullerton, and Second Lieutenant
                      J. H. Ogden (Commanding B Company).

   Died of Wounds--Captain R. W. Shegog, R.A.M.C.

   Wounded and Missing--Lieutenant D. H. Ostrehan (Commanding D
                      Company), and Second Lieutenant C. Rigby.

   Missing--Second Lieutenant D. H. MCSweeney and Second
                      Lieutenant H. S. Holden.

   Wounded--Second Lieutenant H. Tyldesley, Second Lieutenant
                      H. C. Vincent, Second Lieutenant F. C. Jenkinson,
                      Second Lieutenant E. M. Easterby, Captain R. Ord,
                      Captain W. L. B. Caley, Second Lieutenant L.
                      Howarth (with 164th T.M.B.), and Second
                      Lieutenant J. E. Ordish.

Other Ranks:--Killed 44, Wounded 179, Missing 77.

Total Casualties:--Officers 19, Other Ranks 300.

1st August, 1917. Following message has been received:--

“Well done, one-six-four. I am very proud of what you did to-day. It
was a fine performance, and no fault of yours you could not stay.”

                                                    GENERAL JEUDWINE.

“I congratulate all units on having earned this praise, which I know to
be well deserved.”

                                            C. I. STOCKWELL,
                                                 Brigadier-General,
                                     Commanding 164th Infantry Brigade.

The above account may now be amplified and illuminated by a short
summary of the adventures of each Company and Platoon--taken from the
original narratives of the Battalion, which, written in most cases from
the account of surviving private soldiers, are now in the custody of
Colonel C. F. Coop, D.S.O., at Liverpool.

A Company lost its Commander, Captain Harris, soon after passing
the Black Line--he was shot by a sniper; C.S.M. Dudley was later on
wounded and taken prisoner; No. 1 Platoon had its Commander (Sergeant
Entwistle) and the Lewis Gun Corporal wounded when leaving CONGREVE
WALK. It came under machine gun fire just before reaching the BLACK
LINE, and by the time it reached KANSAS CROSS only eleven were left.

“About 12 45 p.m. a heavy machine gun barrage started on our line, and
about 2 p.m. the enemy were seen counter-attacking over ridge on our
right, and I saw the Highlanders withdrawing. This was immediately
followed by an attack on our left. We held on for fully half an hour,
when the order came down from the right, ‘Go back, one by one.’ Only
six of our Platoon were left. We withdrew to shell holes 50 yards back,
though the people on our left and right had fallen farther back. The
enemy were then very close to us, and I think he captured one or two
prisoners.

“At this point we lost touch on both flanks, because we were in advance
of the rest of the line; we therefore withdrew as well as we could,
fighting and firing as we went. We managed to rejoin our own line
just before dusk, and found a few more of our Platoon who had become
separated.”

No. 2 was held up in front of SOMME FARM, a machine gun playing on it
from there; a tank came up and reported to Second Lieutenant McSweeny
and moved to attack.

No. 2 rushed the machine gun and took 60 prisoners. The position
consisted of about six very strong concrete dugouts, one of which was a
Regimental Aid Post and contained several wounded enemy.

At the GREEN LINE they came under heavy shell fire. The enemy could be
seen in full flight, and our Lewis gunners fired on them. There were 15
or 16 of the Platoon left, and they began to dig in; they were in touch
on both flanks.

Later they saw the enemy advancing to counter-attack over the ridge
in front, in several waves, extending to about one and a half yards
between each man, and Second Lieutenant McSweeny was taken prisoner.

Second Lieutenant Tyldsley, commanding No. 3, was wounded just after
passing the BLACK LINE, when it came under very heavy machine gun fire
but advanced to the GREEN LINE without ever being held up.

No. 4 Platoon had ten killed and three wounded by one shell before
leaving Congreve Walk, and Second Lieutenant Ordish was wounded during
the advance.

They were held up by SOMME and by a further line of strong points 150
yards beyond, from which they got about 20 prisoners.

Lieutenant Ogden, Commanding B Company, was killed.

No. 5 went through SOMME, and most of the garrison gave themselves up.
A few tried to run away, and were fired on.

They went through to the outpost line and began to dig in. Second
Lieutenant Mather was siting the trench when he was killed by a
sniper’s bullet, and Sergeant Nabb took over the Platoon.

No. 6, after A Company had dealt with SOMME, moved on to a line of
posts about 500 or 600 yards farther on, which they passed on the flank
and moved on to the outpost line.

No. 7 Platoon, except Lewis gunners, were detached to carry trench
mortar ammunition for the 164th Trench Mortar Battery. Eighteen men
were detached for this purpose. Ten became casualties before leaving
CONGREVE WALK, one shell hitting the lot. The remaining eight carried
up their loads, but quickly became casualties; only two arrived at the
GREEN LINE, carrying four rounds each.

Sergeant Ward was killed.

No. 8 Platoon was detached to mop up Kansas Cross, and was formed up in
rear of No. 4 Platoon, A Company. It suffered ten casualties from shell
fire before leaving CONGREVE WALK, all the bombers being knocked out,
and had a few more casualties before reaching the BLACK LINE, and when
it got to KANSAS Cross it was only about eight or nine strong. “There
were a few concrete dugouts and a trench just on our side of KANSAS
CROSS, also a few ruined buildings. We captured 50 prisoners here, all
of whom gave themselves up without a fight--slightly wounded men taking
them back. After completing the mopping-up, we moved on to assist in
consolidation. Here Second Lieutenant Rigby was wounded.”

No. 9 Platoon suffered many casualties from machine gun traversing
fire, but went on to the OUTPOST LINE. Second Lieutenant Jenkinson was
badly wounded just before getting to the GREEN LINE, and four Germans,
who gave themselves up, carried him down. Prisoners were coming in in
20’s and 30’s.

No. 10, under Second Lieutenant Higson, mopped up KEIR FARM, where
two concrete dugouts were found and a number of prisoners taken, also
documents, some of which were taken from an enemy Liaison Officer. They
advanced to the GREEN LINE, and commenced to consolidate. “No British
contact ’planes flew over; we only saw three enemy ’planes, who flew so
low that they fired at us; also an observation balloon ascended from
ABRAHAM HEIGHTS.

“About two hours after reaching the GREEN LINE the enemy were observed
to be forming up on the heights in front of us, and eventually
counter-attacked on our right against the 15th Division, who commenced
to retire. We formed a defensive flank on our right to get enfilade
fire on the enemy and so cover the retreat of the 15th Division, but
they retired behind us and could give us no assistance when we were
compelled to retire. By this time the enemy had got a machine gun
barrage on our front, also enfilading us on our left, and caused a
number of casualties; we fought a rearguard action along with the rest
of the Battalion until we reached the BLACK LINE.

“S.O.S. signals were sent up from the GREEN LINE, but they all failed
to burst.”

No. 11, under Lieutenant Lonsdale, got held up by the belt of wire
running down the left of Hill 35. This wire had hardly been touched,
but they cut a way through after some time and managed to catch up the
barrage.

“From SOMME FARM came a lot of machine gun fire, so we hung back a bit
and waited for our left flank to come up; we trained our Lewis gun on
to the farm to assist the people on our left. When they approached
fairly close about a dozen of the enemy attempted to make off, but were
either caught by our fire or gave themselves up. From the trenches
running through D 13 central, the enemy began to retire. We opened fire
on them and caused some casualties; some got away and seemed to have
left their equipment and rifles. GALLIPOLI held out for some time, but
we engaged it with the Lewis gun while the remainder worked round it.
The garrison surrendered--about 25 in number. Men went in the rear
side and reported strong machine gun emplacements. From KEIR FARM I
saw about six men run without tunics, but a lot held out until we got
round them; about 20 men gave themselves up from here. The point D 14 c
1 2 was searched and found to be a battery position--as far as I could
make out, three guns. A Corporal and two men were told off to search
for papers, documents, etc. I pressed on with the Platoon, and at a
line in front and to the left of MARTHA HOUSE we came under point-blank
artillery fire from near KANSAS CROSS, but did not stop our advance; it
only seemed to be from one or two guns. At D 14 c 38 we found a battery
position, two guns untouched but several damaged, and an Officer gave
himself up with several men. We then pushed on to the GREEN LINE and
got in touch with the people on our right and sent out patrols to the
left, but could not get in touch. Some of the King’s Own then came up
and were sent on to the left. Having pushed Lewis guns forward with
patrols, we commenced to consolidate, and put in a good two and a half
hours. At 2 30 p.m. the patrols reported a counter-attack on the right
and left. We stood to and opened a heavy rifle and Lewis gun fire on
them, sending up two S.O.S.’s, but neither of them worked.

“In the meantime three enemy aeroplanes flew over our lines, dropping
flares and opening machine gun fire on us. The machine gun fire from
the left began to account for a lot of our men. The enemy appeared
in strength, being in open order. I counted six lines, and yet there
were more following. The sections on our right began to retire across
our rear, and the enemy was beginning to get well behind us. The left
were also pressing, so we decided to retire from the left, covering
the retirement with rifle and Lewis gun fire. We then took up a line
running from Approx. D 20 a 89 to D 14 c 72 in shell holes. We formed a
defensive flank of three Lewis guns along a small ridge to our right.
The enemy pressed on, although we were accounting for a large number
with our rifle fire and the enfilade Lewis gun fire on the right. The
Lewis guns ran short of S.A.A. After we had made a stand for about an
hour, the S.A.A. for the rifles ran short; we collected as much as we
could from the dead and wounded, but it was only about ten rounds per
man. The enemy again succeeded in working round our right, so we had to
retire, fighting a rearguard action on to the old FREZENBERG LINE.”

No. 12 ran into two strong points, and in each case the garrison
gave themselves up. Fifty prisoners came out of one. Both consisted
of concrete dugouts, with trenches in front, and behind one of them
there was a concrete gun emplacement. Sergeant Whiteside, the Platoon
Commander, was wounded. “When the enemy counter-attacked on our right
the Scots retired, and Lieutenant Hore sent some of our party to form a
defensive line on the right flank. We held on for about three-quarters
of an hour, and then we withdrew, dropping in shell holes and firing
as we went back. They fired machine guns on us as we withdrew. A good
number of our wounded were captured, but no unwounded prisoners, as far
as I know.”

No. 13 got to the GREEN LINE and consolidated this, but got mixed up
with other Platoons. “None of us know what happened to Sergeant Yates.
We saw him just before the withdrawal, and he was then unwounded.
Nobody saw him again.”

Second Lieutenant Easterby, Commanding No. 14, was wounded twice,
the second time being just beyond the BLACK LINE. “Two snipers who
caused trouble near GALLIPOLI were captured. The Platoon consolidated
the GREEN LINE until 2 30 p.m., when the enemy counter-attacked on
the right. The Scots on the right were seen to withdraw, and Second
Lieutenant Fullerton, who had taken over command of the whole line,
shouted to us to hang on. He himself established a defensive flank on
our right, but was shortly afterwards killed.”

No. 15, after going 500 or 600 yards, ran into a strong point. “The
barrage had knocked out a machine gun which had been playing on us,
but rifle fire continued to come from this place. We went straight on,
and when we neared the place they gave themselves up. There were about
three dugouts--connected--and about 20 prisoners were taken.”

“On reaching our objective we dug in under machine gun fire from our
left. About 1 15 p.m. we saw the smoke of an engine on the other side
of the ridge. About half an hour after this the enemy appeared over
the ridge, and advanced towards us. We opened on him with Lewis guns.
He was covering his advance with machine guns on the left. The 6th
CAMERONS were seen retiring, and took up a position in a strong point
about 150 yards behind our trench. We hung on to our trench for 20
minutes or half an hour. Second Lieutenant Fullerton acted with great
gallantry during this trying period. He persuaded the whole of our line
to hang on--he was the only Officer left in the GREEN LINE--and it was
a great loss when he was killed, just before we withdrew.”

Only seven of this Platoon survived.

No. 16 was first held up at GALLIPOLI, but continued the advance,
and 150 yards further on found another strong point, consisting of
a trench and a few dugouts. The garrison of the post--about 25 in
all--gave themselves up immediately. They then moved on to the GREEN
LINE, and commenced to dig in. They had been digging for over an hour
when the enemy counter-attacked on the right. “Twenty minutes previous
we had seen the smoke of a train. For a time he was disorganised by
our machine guns and Lewis gun fire; then he advanced on the front of
the Battalion on our right, which withdrew immediately, and the enemy
followed. Second Lieutenant Fullerton ordered us to line the hedge on
our right, and we held on there for half an hour. Meanwhile the enemy
tried to get round behind us, and to a certain extent succeeded.

“Our position was then so bad and our ammunition supply so small
that we had to withdraw, moving back step by step in small parties.
Gradually we worked back to the BLACK LINE, though some of our
men--including Lieutenant Holden--were captured.”


EXTRACT FROM WAR DIARY--Continued.

At 12 midnight, July 31st/August 1st, the Battalion held a line of
resistance just in front of the Black Line. At 1 15 a.m. completion of
relief by the 165th Infantry Brigade was reported, and the remnant of
the Battalion were ordered to concentrate in our original front line
between Warwick Farm and Lone Street. This was done, and Battalion
Headquarters was established at the mined dugouts in Oxford Trench. At
10 a.m. Headquarters was transferred to the mined dugout at WIELTJE.

Meanwhile an effort was being made to collect our stragglers. During
the withdrawal a great many men had become separated from their
Platoons, and by 2 p.m. on the 1st of August only 90 of our men had
assembled in the old front line. In ones and twos they were eventually
brought in, though some remained behind with the 165th and 166th
Brigades in the Black Line till 24 hours or more after the Battalion
had been relieved.

The weather was desperate; rain was pouring down all day, and the
trenches were in a terrible state. Four or five derelict tanks could
be counted, stuck deep in the mud, either in our old front line or in
the German original front line. The day was fairly quiet, and there was
only a little shelling in the vicinity of WIELTJE.

About mid-day the enemy counter-attacked on the front of the Division
on our right, and succeeded in making a small breach in the Black Line.
In the evening of this day a cooker was brought up with hot tea, etc.,
for the men.

Lieutenant G. J. Fismer, R.A.M.C., reported for duty vice Captain R. W.
Shegog, R.A.M.C., died of wounds.

Casualties:--Officers: Lieutenant C. L. Hore, M.C., to Field Ambulance
sick; Other Ranks: Nil.

With reference to the attack in which the Battalion took part, the
following points are of interest:--

1. Ammunition ran short in every Company, a proof of the fact that the
rifle has again come to its own as the chief weapon of the infantryman.

2. It is estimated that quite 90 per cent. of the casualties were
caused by machine gun fire and snipers.

3. Casualties amongst Officers were exceedingly heavy, and great
responsibility devolved upon N.C.O.’s. This fact emphasised the
necessity for careful preparation, by means of daily lectures and
demonstrations to all Platoon Sergeants and Section Commanders.

4. It is generally agreed that on this occasion the men were far too
heavily laden. It is thought that in an attack of this kind, when a
distance of several thousand yards has to be traversed, it is far
better to go lightly equipped, and to trust to the probability of being
able to get additional supplies of water and rations from the rear as
soon as darkness falls.

5. All systems of communication, except runners, broke down. Visual was
impossible owing to the dull mist which prevailed, and wires, when once
laid, were soon broken.

6. Tanks were a failure (except possibly in one case), the ground being
far too wet and heavy. One tank is said to have done useful work in
co-operation with the infantry in reducing Somme Farm.

7. Aeroplanes for some reason failed us, the R.F.C. evidently
considering the bad visibility sufficient reason to cancel flying.
This was particularly unfortunate, as the enemy were not slow to
take advantage accordingly, and three hostile machines are reported
to have been flying over our positions practically all the time that
consolidation was in progress. In one case a machine gun was fired at
our troops.

8. Lastly, many acts of extreme gallantry and devotion to duty were
reported after the fighting of the 31st July, on the part of all ranks
of the Battalion.

In fact the 55th Division as a whole, and particularly the 164th
Brigade, will ever be remembered for its share in the attack which
started the third battle of YPRES. The 164th Infantry Brigade in
particular can ever be proud of the advance from the Black Line to the
Green Line.

Copies of the following messages and letters are attached:--

   (1) From Major-General H. S. JEUDWINE, C.B., G.O.C. 55th
          Division, to Brigadier-General C. I. STOCKWELL, D.S.O.,
          Commanding 164th Brigade.

   (2) 55th Division Special Order of the Day.

   (3) Letter from 5th Army Headquarters to XIX. Corps.

   (4) 5th Army Commander’s Congratulations.

                                                Fifth Army.
                                                      2nd August, 1917.


               Appendix to D.R.O.’s of 7th August, 1917.

                   Army Commander’s Congratulations.

1. The Army Commander wishes to offer his heartiest congratulations to
the troops under his command on the success gained by them on July 31st.

2. For a fortnight prior to the attack the enemy has maintained a
heavy and continuous artillery fire, including an unprecedented use
of H.V. guns against back areas and a new form of gas shell, all of
which caused severe casualties. Despite this and the fact that the
forward area was dominated by the enemy at all points, the necessary
preparations for the battle were completed and the difficult forward
march and assembly of nine Divisions successfully carried out and the
assault launched. This alone constitutes a performance of which the
Army may well be proud.

3. As a result of the battle, the enemy has once again been driven by
the 1st French Army and ourselves from the whole of his front system on
a front of about eight miles, and we are now firmly established in or
beyond his second line on a front of seven miles.

4. We have already captured 5,448 prisoners, including 125 Officers. Up
to date the capture of eight guns, 10 trench mortars, and 36 machine
guns has been reported.

5. In addition we have inflicted extremely heavy casualties on the
enemy. Owing to losses during our preliminary bombardment, he was
forced to bring up six fresh Divisions. Since then three more Divisions
have been withdrawn shattered. Thus, in a fortnight, we have disposed
of seven or eight Divisions and severely handled 10 more, several of
which must be shortly withdrawn.

6. The 2nd Army on our right and the 1st French Army on our left have
been as successful as ourselves. The French captures to date number 157
prisoners and three guns. The 2nd Army have also taken 390 prisoners
and several machine guns.

7. Despite the weather on the day of the battle, we shot down five
enemy machines and one balloon, losing only one machine ourselves.

                                           (Signed) R. T. COLLINS,
                                              Lieutenant-Colonel,
                                                For Major-General, G.S.

       *       *       *       *       *

55th (West Lancashire) Division.

Special Order of the Day.

    3rd August, 1917.

To All Ranks of the 55th (West Lancashire) Division.

Before you went into action on the 31st July, I told you how confident
I was that the Division would do its duty and maintain its reputation
and the reputation of the grand Regiments to which you belong.

You have done more than that.

The attack you made on the 31st is worthy to rank with the great deeds
of the British Army in the past, and has added fresh glory to the
record of that Army.

The courage, determination, and self-sacrifice shown by Officers,
Warrant Officers, Non-Commissioned Officers, and men is beyond praise.
It is a fine exhibition of true discipline, which comes from the mutual
confidence of all ranks in themselves, their comrades, their leaders,
and those under them. This in its turn is the product of hard training.
Your doings on the 31st show how well you have turned this training to
account.

You captured every inch of the objectives allotted to you. It was not
your fault that you could not hold all you took. You have broken and
now hold, in spite of weather and counter-attacks, a line that the
enemy has strengthened and consolidated at his leisure for more than
two years.

This will, I believe, be the beginning of the end. When your turn comes
to go forward again you will know your own strength and the enemy will
know it too.

I am proud of what you have done and am confident that with such troops
ultimate victory is certain.

                                     H. S. JEUDWINE,
                                           Major-General,
                            Commanding 55th (West Lancashire) Division.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                                 Fifth Army.
                                                     3rd August, 1917.

XIX. Corps.

The Army Commander wishes to convey his thanks and congratulations to
the G.O.C. and all ranks of the 164th Brigade on their fine performance
on July 31st. They carried out their task in a most gallant manner and
fought splendidly to retain their hold on the ground won. All Officers
showed energy, courage, and initiative in dealing with the situation,
and the men under their command, in spite of heavy losses, did their
utmost, by carrying out their orders, to ensure our success and the
enemy’s defeat.

Great credit and praise is due to the G.O.C. 164th Brigade for the
magnificent behaviour of the troops under his command.

                                           (Signed) N. MALCOLM,
                                                    Major-General, G.S.


The Brigadier-General commanding has much pleasure in forwarding
the above remarks of the Army Commander and directs that these be
communicated to all ranks.

He considers that all the credit and praise is due to the Officers and
men of the Brigade.

                                                  Captain,
                                             Acting Brigade Major,
                                                164th Infantry Brigade.

6th August, 1917.




                             CHAPTER VII.

           REORGANISATION, AND THE BATTLE OF THE MENIN ROAD.


On the 2nd August, 1917, the remnant of the Battalion was relieved by
the 9th Royal Irish Rifles (36th--Ulster--Division), and assembled at
a camp near VLAMERTINGHE, where they found the members of B team and
food, and had a good sleep. At 10 p.m. that night we moved in motor
’buses to the WATOU area, where we took over our old camp. Lieutenant
G. M. Fismer, R.A.M.C., and one Other Rank had been wounded in coming
out of the line, and Lieutenant J. E. Ratcliffe reported as Medical
Officer; on the following day Lieutenant W. L. Price and Second
Lieutenants R. Grisdale and A. P. Smith and 108 Other Ranks reported as
reinforcements.

On the 5th we marched to ABEELE, where we entrained and travelled via
ST. OMER and WATTEN to AUDRUICQ, arriving there about 5 p.m. Here we
found lurries waiting to take us to our new billeting area, AUDREHEM, a
pleasant village just big enough to hold us.

On the 7th, Second Lieutenant Holden came back from attachment to the
R.E.’s with 23 Other Ranks, and Captain C. M. Denton and 34 Other Ranks
reported as reinforcements. During the next few days Captain Houghton,
Second Lieutenant Vincent and Second Lieutenant Swaine rejoined us and
Major de Wend Fenton. Second Lieutenant F. Shippobottom and Second
Lieutenant A. B. Fergie reported for duty along with nine Other Ranks,
while on the 18th Second Lieutenant J. Hailwood and A. Martin, and on
the 21st Second Lieutenants A. H. Doleman, S. A. H. Pruden, and Iners
joined us, followed by Second Lieutenants H. W. C. Griffiths, H. Dance,
and J. Oldham on the 22nd.

The following honours were announced for gallantry in action in the
recent battle:--

    BAR TO D.S.O.      Lieutenant-Colonel R. Hindle, D.S.O.
    MILITARY CROSS     Second Lieutenant H. C. Vincent, B Company.
                       Second Lieutenant H. Lonsdale, C Company.
    D.C.M.              24908 Lance-Corporal E. Ashton, A Company.
                       201260 Lance-Corporal T. Butcher, A Company.
    MILITARY MEDAL     200057 Sergeant J. Heaps, Headqrs.
                       201530 Lance-Corporal P. Norris, B Company.
                       200643 Sergeant J. E. Cookson, D Company.
                        34879 Sergeant J. Cosgrove, C Company.
                       200809 Corporal F. Pitcher, B Company.
                       200414 Lance-Corporal W. H. Clarkson, Headqrs.
                       202761 Private J. Spencer, D Company.
                       200146 Private J. Bates, Transport.
                       200357 Private J. H. Parkinson, Transport.
                        12910 Private D. Rathbone, C Company.
                        31987 Lance-Corporal J. Walmsley, A Company.

It is fashionable among fighting men to belittle the honours which
they themselves have earned, knowing as they do that many individuals
employed at bases have received decorations which were never meant to
be conferred for anything except gallantry in action, while others
who have abundantly deserved them have either died before they were
granted or have had no witness surviving to report their conduct; it is
therefore only fair to mention that when “immediate awards,” such as
the above, are made to fighting men, it is as a result of reports sent
in by eyewitnesses, which, in our Battalion at any rate, were tested by
cross-examining those mentioned in them as to the deeds of others, the
resulting list of recommendations being further checked and often cut
down by Brigade.

We enjoyed our stay at AUDREHEM, knowing that our last battle
had raised us to the status of Storm Troops, and that when we
moved up again it would be for another attack and not back to the
demoralising influences of trench life. With this in view we carefully
reorganised and trained, all ranks working together keenly with one
end in view--efficiency, with the result that in six weeks a tired,
straggling, muddy, shaken remnant was transformed once more into a
smart Battalion, well organised and equipped, and trained with special
reference to attacking concrete blockhouses. Officers daily attended
lectures by one of their number on some phase of the attack, and
Company Commanders held daily conferences of their N.C.O.’s and senior
Privates, so that however heavy might be the casualties among leaders,
someone might remain with the necessary knowledge to carry on. Every
fine day Companies marched with their cookers to the training area at
GUEMY, and remained there all day doing progressive field training;
there was football, boxing, a Divisional horse show, and other
delights, as well as Brigade days, and the Commander-in-Chief himself
came one day to see us at work; so the days slipped by until the 14th
September. Captain Duckworth went as Second in Command to the 1/8th
King’s Liverpool Regiment, and various other Officers left us sick or
to other units, so that when B team had been detailed the following
Officers moved up to take part in the attack:--

    Lieutenant-Colonel R. Kindle, D.S.O.   Commanding.
    Captain A. T. Houghton                 Second in Command.
    Captain R. N. Buckmaster               Adjutant.
    Lieutenant Bardsley                    Transport Officer.
    Second Lieutenant Brooke               Intelligence Officer.
    Second Lieutenant Whitehouse           Signalling Officer.
    Lieutenant Radcliffe, R.A.M.C.         Medical Officer.
    Lieutenant E. G. Baker                 }
    Second Lieutenant A. P. Smith          } A Company.
    Second Lieutenant H. Dance             }
    Second Lieutenant J. Oldham            }

    Captain F. W. S. Baker                 }
    Major Fenton                           }  B Company.
    Second Lieutenant Holmes               }
    Second Lieutenant Fergie               }

    Captain R. H. Tautz                    }
    Second Lieutenant Pruden               }  C Company.
    Second Lieutenant Grisdale             }

    Lieutenant Holden                      }
    Lieutenant Price                       }  D Company.
    Second Lieutenant Martin               }
    Second Lieutenant Myers                }

On the 14th the Battalion, including B team, marched to AUBRUICQ,
proceeding thence by train to a point near YPRES, where we took over
a bivouac camp near GOLDFISH CHATEAU--a muddy field with pits dug all
over it, each just big enough to shelter two or three men, and covered
with sheets of corrugated iron.

  [Illustration: Aeroplane Photo taken 9th September, 1917, from a point
  near Pond Farm.]

Since 31st July, 1917, the ground along the STEENBEEK captured by us
on that day had been the scene of bloody fighting, two attempts by
other Divisions to advance beyond the Black Line of the previous attack
having been made and having failed, so that with small variations the
front taken over by us on 15th September was identical with that held
when we had come out six weeks before.

The ground over which we had to pass was commanded by two spurs--the
GRAFENSTAFEL SPUR half a mile to the north, and the GALLIPOLI SPUR,
part of which was within our frontage, to the south; and apart from the
concrete blockhouses on our own front, every yard of our advance was
raked by machine gun bullets from innumerable others on our flanks, so
that until these were put out of action no advance was possible without
appalling losses. Add to this the total absence of landmarks in that
amorphous wilderness, where no trees, no blade of grass remained, every
square yard of ground having been churned up by our shell fire--the
extreme difficulty of distinguishing one blockhouse from another--the
fact that Companies had been reduced to three Platoons and Platoons
to only 20 men owing to lack of sufficient reinforcements--and when
you have studied the maps and photographs and tried to visualise the
ground, you may form some idea of what the Battalion had to do on the
20th September, 1917. The GRAFENSTAFEL ROAD was our one hope of keeping
direction--the road which, as the photographs clearly show, became
utterly indistinguishable from the surrounding mire within 200 yards of
our starting point; when this failed, general direction was only kept
by use of the compass.

The material paragraphs of the Operation Order and the official account
of the battle are as follows:--

                         THE OPERATION ORDER.

1.

    (a) The 55th Division will attack on Z day. The 9th Division
            will be on the right, and the 58th Division on the left.

    (b) The 165th Infantry Brigade will be on the right, the 164th
            Infantry Brigade on the left, the 166th Brigade less two
            Battalions will be in reserve.

    (c) The 1/4th Royal Lancaster Regiment and the 1/4th Loyal
            North Lancashire Regiment will be in the right or KEIR
            sector.

        The 2/5th Lancashire Fusiliers in the centre or COTTS sector.

        The 1/8th Liverpool Regiment in the left or SCHULER sector.

        The 1/5th Royal Lancaster Regiment will be attached to the
            164th Infantry Brigade and be available for the
            countering of enemy counter-attacks.

2. On the night 13th/14th the (German) 2nd Guards Reserve Division came
into the line opposite to the 55th Divisional front and is reported
to be holding the line with all three regiments up, one Battalion of
each Regiment being in the line, one in support, and one in immediate
reserve.

Those in reserve are located west of the PASSCHENDALE RIDGE.

3.

    (a) First pause of the barrage      RED DOTTED LINE.
        First objective in              YELLOW LINE.
        Final objective in              GREEN LINE.

4. It is the intention to capture and occupy as a line of resistance
the GREEN LINE.

The attack will be made in stages under cover of a creeping barrage.

There will be a pause of at least half an hour on the RED DOTTED LINE
and again on the YELLOW LINE.

5. The plan of attack and objectives will be as follows:--

In the KEIR sector:

The 1/4th Royal Lancaster Regiment will attack at ZERO in four waves,
the first two waves extended and the second two in columns.

    Objectives:--First two waves       Red Dotted Line.
                 Second two waves      Yellow Line,

after which they will support the capture of the Green Line.

In the COTTS sector:--

The 2/5th Lancashire Fusiliers will attack at ZERO, in four waves.

    Objectives:--First wave       Red Dotted Line.
                 Second wave      Yellow Line.
                 Third wave       Green Line, an advanced strong
                                      point established at Green House.

In the SCHULER sector:--

    Two Companies 1/8th Liverpool Regiment will attack at ZERO in two
         waves.

    Objectives:--First wave       Red Dotted Line.
                 Second wave      Yellow Line.

Two Companies will be in the hands of the Officer Commanding 1/8th
Liverpool Regiment.

  [Illustration:

      _I. 15^{th} June 1917._

      _II. 16^{th} June 1917._

      _III. 27^{th} July 1917. Three days before
      the 3^{rd} Battle of YPRES._

      _IV. 13^{th} August 1917._

      _V. 13^{th} September 1917.
      Seven days before the battle
      of the MENIN ROAD._

  Five Aeroplane Photographs showing the gradual disappearance of
  all features and landmarks in Map square D.13.c., between June and
  September, 1917.]

  [Illustration:

     Map No. 3

  OBJECTIVES in the BATTLE of the MENIN ROAD Sept. 20th, 1917]

6. The Battalion will assemble in three lines at 20 yards’ distance,
the leading line being about 150 yards west of the assembly line of the
1/4th Royal Lancaster Regiment in the following order:--

   First wave, from right to left--14 Platoon, 13 Platoon, 1
       Platoon, 2 Platoon.

   Second wave, from right to left--9 Platoon, 10 Platoon, 11
       Platoon, 5 Platoon, 6 Platoon, 7 Platoon.

   Third wave, from right to left--15 Platoon, machine guns, 3
       Platoon.

Captain Houghton will be responsible for the taping of these lines and
supplying two guides to each Company to lead them to their position of
assembly.

7. Distribution of Companies during the advance:--

   First wave, from right to left--Two Platoons D Company, two
       Platoons A Company.

   Second wave, from right to left--C Company, B Company.

   Third wave, from right to left--One Platoon D Company, one
       Platoon A Company.

The first wave will form two lines of extended order before crossing
the Yellow Line.

The objective of the first wave will be an outpost line passing through
FOKKER FARM--D 14 c 9 9 and D 14 d 1 5.

Garrisons will be detailed in advance:--For FOKKER FARM by A Company,
and dugouts D 14 d 1 6 by D Company.

Strong points will be constructed at these points and others in between
should it be found necessary, the principle being that the whole front
should be:--

    (a) Covered by enfilade machine gun or Lewis gun fire.

    (b) Under observation.

The objective of the second wave will be approximately the Green Line.

The garrison will be detailed beforehand for the dugouts D 14 c 4 9 by
B Company.

The objectives of the third wave will be to ensure that the first and
second waves reach their objectives.

Garrisons will be detailed beforehand for dugouts D 14 c 4 4 and MARTHA
HOUSE by D Company.

Dugouts at D 14 a 2 O and KANSAS HOUSE by A Company.

8. Unexpected concrete defences encountered during the advance will be
garrisoned and consolidated, as soon as the final objective is taken,
on the following principle: Each wave will be responsible for all
ground between itself and the leading line of the wave in its rear.
Should any pockets of the enemy still remain, they will be mopped up as
this is taking place.

12. The reserve Battalion (1/5th Royal Lancaster Regiment) will arrive
in the area AISNE--HINDU COT--POND FARM about the time that the Green
Line is taken.

The role of this Battalion will be to deliver an immediate
counter-stroke against any hostile counter-attack.

13. Prisoners’ escorts, messengers, etc., when returning to their
Companies from the rear, will take back six bandoliers of S.A.A. from
the forward dumps.

14. Dress:--Fighting order, with packs instead of haversacks. Every
N.C.O. and man will carry:--

    1 No. 23 rifle grenade.
    2 Aeroplane flares.
    4 Sandbags.
    1 Bandolier extra S.A.A.--Carried in the pack.
    1 Lewis gun magazine

Parties of men specially selected to deal with dugouts will carry two
No. 23 rifle grenades.

Every rifle grenadier will carry six Hales No. 24 rifle grenades.

Shovels will be carried by every man, less runners, signallers,
stretcher-bearers, and Nos. 1 and 2 of Lewis gun teams.

Men carrying shovels will not carry the entrenching tool.

Bayonets will not be fixed until immediately before leaving the
assembly line.

15. The Battalion will be fitted out on the early morning of Y day.
Bombs and S.A.A. will be drawn from the St. Jean dump by small parties
from each Company. At the same time parties will draw shovels and
sandbags from the Divisional R.E. dump, St. Jean--Wieltje Road, 600
yards west of Wieltje. These carrying parties must have returned to
Congreve Walk--Liverpool Line by 5 30 a.m. on Y day. After that hour
there must be no movement over the open.

16. The Brigade main dump is at C 23 c 3 1 (old German front line).
Advanced Brigade dumps are established at Spree Farm (C 18 d 5 3) and
at dugouts C 18 d 7 5.

17. All ranks will carry during the attack the iron ration and the
unexpended portion of Z day’s rations.

Rations for Z plus 1 day will be dumped as far forward as possible.
Water bottles will be filled from the water-carts on the evening of Y
day.

18. Barrage map will be issued later.

19. Points for Liaison:--

    With 2/5th Lancashire Fusiliers      KANSAS HOUSE.
                                            D 14 a 0 2.
    With 1/6th Liverpool Regiment        D 14 c 5 4.
                                         D 14 c 95 40.

20. Headquarters 164th and 165th Infantry Brigades will be the Wieltje
dugout. Battalion Headquarters will be at the commencement Capricorn
Keep and dugouts C 18 d 8 6; subsequent moves will be notified.

21. Aid Post:--Pond Farm, C 18 b 8 0.

22. ZERO HOUR will be 5 40 a.m.

    Watches will be synchronised.

23. Communication between Companies and Battalion Headquarters will be
by runner and visual.

All messages will be duplicated by a second means of transmission.

Two pigeons will be carried by D Company and two by A Company, moving
in the leading wave.

Second Lieutenant Whitehurst will be responsible for:--

    (a) Laying a wire from Battalion Headquarters to Brigade
             forward station at Pond Farm, and from Battalion
             Headquarters to Battalion forward command post.

    (b) Establishing visual between Battalion Headquarters
             and Battalion forward command post about D 13 central,
             if practicable.

    (c) Establishing relay runner posts about D 13 c 2 6, D 13 d 1
             6, and Keir Farm.

  [Illustration: Oblique Aeroplane Photograph showing our objectives in
  the Battle of the MENIN ROAD--(Contrast the condition of the
  foreground and the middle distance).]

Contact ’plane can be recognised by a rectangular attachment on both
lower planes and a white dumb-bell on either side of the body.

Whenever the ’plane calls for signals by sounding the klaxon horn or
firing a white Verey light, the most advanced lines of infantry will:--

    (a) Light flares in the bottom of a shell hole.

    (b) Show Watson fans--white and coloured sides alternately 30
             seconds.

    The ’plane will call for signals at ZERO plus 1 hour.
                                        ZERO plus 2 hours.
                                        ZERO plus 2½ hours.

and at such other times as may be necessary.

S.O.S. signal is a rifle grenade bursting into two red and two green
lights.

24. Second Lieutenant Brooke will be responsible for:--

    (a) Keeping liaison with 1/4th Royal Lancaster Regiment during
          their advance to the Yellow Line.

    (b) Establishing a Battalion forward command post about D 13
             central and keeping the whole front under close
             observation.

25. Acknowledge in writing.

    18th September, 1917.         (Signed) R. N. L. BUCKMASTER,
        Issued at 8 a.m.              Captain and Adjutant,
                              1/4th Loyal North Lancashire Regiment.

       *       *       *       *       *

                       EXTRACTED FROM WAR DIARY.


YPRES.

15th September. Fairly quiet day.

One Other Rank reinforcement. One Other Rank to Field Ambulance sick.

16th September. About 10 45 a.m. 10 enemy aeroplanes dropped bombs in
the vicinity of the camp, causing one casualty. Road near camp heavily
shelled at dusk.

Two Other Ranks wounded.

17th September. Situation normal. Reconnaissance of forward area
carried out. W day in connection with forthcoming operations.

One Other Rank killed in VLAMERTINGHE.

18th September (X day). Day spent in fitting out, etc. On the evening
of this day the Battalion moved forward to the Congreve Walk--Liverpool
Trench line, running through the village of St. Jean. Our artillery
were very active throughout the night.

Two Other Ranks wounded. One Other Rank died of wounds.


ST. JEAN (TRENCHES).

19th September. Commencing at dawn, our artillery opened the 24 hours’
bombardment preparatory to the attack. The enemy’s reply during the day
was exceedingly feeble.

Commencing 9 30 p.m., the Battalion moved off from ST. JEAN by Platoons
at 200 yards’ distance, via the WIELTJE--GRAVENSTAFEL road. The night
was quiet, and there was practically no hostile shelling.

Battalion Headquarters were established at CAPRICORN KEEP (C 18 d
55 65) at 11 p.m. The KEEP consisted of six very strong dugouts of
reinforced concrete. Three were taken over as headquarters by this unit
and three by the 1/4th Royal Lancaster Regiment.

Casualties:--Two Other Ranks killed; three Other Ranks wounded.

20th September. The Battalion was reported in position of assembly at
1 a.m. The lines to be taken up by the various waves were marked by
tape, which had been laid as soon as darkness permitted. When once in
position the assaulting troops lay in shell holes until ZERO hour. A
continuous drizzling rain made the ground sticky and the going bad.
The line of assembly was a north--south line running through SOMME (D
13 c 50 25). During the night things were fairly quiet, though lively
artillery fire developed on our right soon after 3 a.m.

ZERO hour was at 5 40 a.m., at which time the artillery barrage opened.

The 1/4th Loyal North Lancashire Regiment moved forward from the
assembly position in rear of the 1/4th Royal Lancaster Regiment. The
1/4th Royal Lancaster Regiment had for its objective (1) the RED DOTTED
LINE and (2) the YELLOW LINE, and it was intended that the 1/4th Loyal
North Lancashire Regiment should “leap-frog” at the YELLOW LINE and
capture and consolidate the GREEN LINE.

The enemy barrage was promptly opened on the approximate line of our
assembly position--a proof that the enemy were fully prepared for the
attack. This caused the three rear waves, i.e., the four Companies of
the 1/4th Loyal North Lancashire Regiment, to close well up on to the
1/4th Royal Lancaster Regiment, and it appears that in a good many
cases this was overdone, causing the two units to be intermingled and
considerably undermining the principles of organisation.

The creeping barrage was being governed by two new principles, tried
for the first time and designed to combat and counteract the enemy’s
new system of defence:--(1) there were two definite pauses in the
barrage, during which it was intended that Companies should replace
casualties from the rear and generally reorganise; (2) the barrage
started to move forward at the rate of six minutes every hundred yards
and later at the rate of eight minutes every hundred yards.

The attack to commence with went well, though a great many casualties
were inflicted by enemy machine gun fire, which from the start was
very well directed. AISNE FARM was reported taken at 6 5 a.m., though
a Platoon of the 1/4th Loyal North Lancashires had to give assistance
in the attack on this strong point. A message timed 8 17 a.m. stated,
“Attack appears to be going well.”

The first pause was made on the RED DOTTED LINE, though apparently
very little reorganisation was found practicable. Soon after moving
forward again considerable trouble was caused by hostile machine guns
on the flanks bringing enfilade fire to bear on our advancing troops.
According to reports received, this was particularly the case on the
right, where the left Battalion of the 165th Infantry Brigade was held
up before GALLIPOLI, as a result of which an enemy machine gun on Hill
37 was playing havoc with the waves in the valley through which we were
advancing.

The result of these obstructions on either flank was that the men of
this Battalion in many cases inclined outwards, leaving an exceedingly
thin line facing the original objective. In some cases whole Platoons
found themselves attacking strong points on the frontage of other
Battalions. Particularly was this so in the case of GALLIPOLI, in
the ultimate capture of which men of this Battalion very materially
assisted.

Very few of our men reached the YELLOW LINE, though a message from the
Battalion O.P., timed 8 45 a.m., stated that it appeared to be taken
and consolidation commenced. Finally, therefore, a line of resistance
was sited and consolidated about mid-day between the RED DOTTED and
YELLOW LINE, with posts of Lewis gun teams thrown out 50 to 100 yards
to the front.

The enemy was not finally dislodged from the vicinity of GALLIPOLI and
the adjoining SUVLA until after 10 a.m., by which time the barrage was
of no further assistance.

20th September. At 10 50 a.m. the enemy was reported massing for a
counter-attack in the vicinity of NILE and FOKKER FARMS, but nothing
except heavy shelling materialised on our front. Soon after 1 p.m.
various S.O.S.’s were sent up, and apparently local counter-attacks,
without any success, were launched on both our flanks.

In the afternoon an effort was made to reorganise the Battalion, which
was now reported to consist of only four Officers and 60 rifles in
the firing line. The right Battalion frontage was now being held by a
mixed line of the 1/4th Royal Lancaster Regiment and the 1/4th Loyal
North Lancashire Regiment, stiffened by two Companies of the 1/5th
Royal Lancaster Regiment, who, as Battalion in Brigade reserve, and
detailed to assist in the capture of the objective and to deal with any
hostile counter-attack, had dug themselves in on a line in rear of our
consolidated positions.

About 7 p.m. an Officers’ patrol went forward to reconnoitre KEIR FARM
and discover whether it was held by the enemy. This patrol, however,
did not succeed in its objective and lost its way, and the project had
to be postponed till the following morning.

As soon as darkness allowed, an effort was made to examine our
positions and to find out whether measures for defence were complete.
They were found to be held by at least six Lewis guns, while there were
in all four machine guns, two of which were German, and proved very
useful against the enemy.

During the night patrols were sent out, and a further effort made to
find the defences of KEIR FARM. KEIR FARM was not identified, and it
was therefore assumed that it no longer existed as a concrete defence.
No signs of the enemy were seen. The night passed without incident,
though shelling on both sides was maintained fairly consistently.

Casualties:--

   Officers:--

   Killed--Captain F. W. S. Baker (Commanding B Company),
                      Second Lieutenant A. B. Fergie.

   Wounded--Captain R. H. Tautz, M.C. (Commanding C Company),
                      Second Lieutenant E. G. Baker (Commanding A
                      Company), Second Lieutenant A. P. Smith, Second
                      Lieutenant H. Dance, Second Lieutenant J. Oldham,
                      Second Lieutenant R. Grisedale, Second
                      Lieutenant A. Martin, Second Lieutenant B. Myers,
                      Second Lieutenant C. B. Holmes (died of wounds,
                      28th September, 1917).

   Other Ranks:--Killed 23, Wounded 161, Missing 11; Total 195.

   Four Other Ranks reinforcements from base.

The following notes by an Officer who was present are added to complete
the account:--

At about 10 p.m. the Battalion began to arrive by Platoons, each
Platoon coming up in silence, knowing we were close up to the enemy
outposts, winding in single file over the uneven ground, being shown
its tape, filing along it and lying down to wait for the dawn; the
assembly was completed by 1 a.m.--the hour fixed, and apparently
unknown to the enemy.

At this hour, to add to the discomfort, a steady drizzle set in, but a
tot of rum was served out and most of the men were soon asleep, to be
waked at dawn by the crash of our opening barrage.

Battalion Headquarters retired to CAPRICORN KEEP, while the Medical
Officer and his men settled in POND GALLERIES. Both these blockhouses
had been built of concrete by the Boche to shelter his reserves from
our shelling in earlier days--during the days that followed they were
severely tested, but never failed us.

At ZERO, 5 40 a.m., while it was still dark, down came our creeping
barrage, and the King’s Own began to advance. Our men had been told
to give them a good start and, full of eagerness as they were, would
have done so had the answering enemy barrage not come down on their
tails; this had been foreseen and its position judged from previous
registration, and the assembly position was just in front--but only
just--and the “shorts” got some of our men, causing the rest to hurry
and close up on the King’s Own, who were already passing AISNE FARM. We
had to complete the capture of this, and lost heavily in the process.

Under terrific machine gun fire from the front and both flanks, causing
casualties at every step, the two Battalions struggled forward to get
to grips with their unseen enemies, and soon arrived at the two groups
of blockhouses, LOOS and GALLIPOLI, with four others lying between them.

These two groups, though the latter was off the allotted front, at
once became the immediate objectives--the left hand Companies took the
LOOS blockhouses one by one, nine in all, with bomb and bayonet; the
Companies on the right swung round and joined the King’s Liverpool
Regiment in storming GALLIPOLI; in the centre small parties of men,
their Officers having been hit, took the other four and so reached the
RED LINE.

Lieutenant Brooke went forward, and, with a few signallers, established
a forward command post near LOOS; our machine gunners came up and
turned five of the newly-taken Hun machine guns round on the enemy, and
things seemed to be going well, but the hour-long pause of the barrage
was too long, the hail of cross-fire from more distant machine guns
still continued, and the men, who had sought cover in shell holes, were
out of sight and scattered, though strenuous efforts to reorganise were
made by the few leaders who remained, and with a certain amount of
success. But the line had lost its cohesion, and when the barrage went
on only a portion of the line saw it and attempted to follow.

Lieutenant Brooke had notified the capture of the Red Line to Battalion
Headquarters, but no further message coming through, the Second in
Command went forward to clear up the situation; on reaching the Red
Line he could at first see no one, but soon stumbled into a shell hole
full of men, and was able, running from one hole to another, to locate
the whole line up to the flanks of the adjoining Battalions, and to
estimate the casualties.

The barrage had already passed the Green Line and the machine guns in
the blockhouses were active. Their crews could see every movement, and
the troops on both flanks were stationary, so that at the moment no
further advance was likely to succeed--moreover, everyone had had time
to feel the reaction. So the order was given to dig in and to send out
small patrols to try to occupy the ground immediately in front, and by
this means the line was advanced still further.

Lieutenant Holden took charge of one of these, while Second Lieutenant
Pruden supervised consolidation.

About this time the Hun seems to have realised the position, for he
opened out with every gun he had, shelling the captured pillboxes and
putting a very heavy barrage all round the aid post and Battalion
Headquarters, but his attempt at counter-attack was beaten off by
machine gun, Lewis gun, and rifle fire.

We afterwards found out that SUVLA and THE CAPITOL had not been taken,
nor had CROSS COTS--had they been the cross-machine gun fire on us
would have been much less intense.

No praise is too high for our stretcher-bearers, who--all through that
day and the succeeding days--toiled without intermission bringing in
wounded; the aid post was in the line of the Hun barrage, a concrete
structure, with a passage two feet wide on the enemy side with chambers
opening off it; the stretcher cases had to be dressed out in the open,
while the passage was crowded with walking wounded, some of them
Huns--the look of utter weariness and dejection on the faces of the
latter was a thing not easily forgotten.

The runners did splendid work; a few were killed as they made their way
over the shell-tossed ground--the wonder is that any escaped.

For five days the Battalion remained in those shell holes, beating off
one counter-attack after another with the help of our gunners, who were
truly magnificent. At first it was impossible to reorganise properly
owing to the mixing of Battalions, but ultimately a definite frontage
was allotted to us by Brigade, and that night we sorted ourselves out
from the King’s Own and Companies were picked out and given a definite
bit of line--A and B in front, C and D in close support. At the same
time the line was advanced considerably, especially on the right, the
posts on HILL 37 having been taken by the right Brigade.

Getting rations up to the line was a terrible business--runners and
guides kept losing their way, and more than one party nearly entered
Hun territory; but guide wires were laid to Companies, the C.Q.M.S.’s
did their work splendidly, and the men were fed and kept going.

About 25th September we were relieved by the 59th Division, a genial
lot--full strength--who seemed to expect to find trenches and dugouts!
Thanks to the tapes and wires which had been laid, relief was quick,
and we all dribbled back to ST. JEAN, where Companies assembled by
the cookers and had hot tea and rum served out. They were actually
singing--the revulsion, I suppose.

After a lot of delay we got into trucks on the DECAUVILLE railway (a
metre gauge affair). The Commanding Officer was balanced on the back
of the little engine, and as we started, some wit shouted out, “Don’t
move, sir! You might upset her!”

Additional light is thrown on the course of the battle by the Platoon
narratives:--

Lieutenant E. G. Baker, Commanding A Company, was hit in the head
during the advance. No. 1 Platoon Commander, Lieutenant Smith, was
badly wounded in the thigh before the first strong point was reached.
Private Wyre fired some rifle grenades into it, after which the Platoon
rushed it with men of other units, and bombed and bayonetted the enemy
out. Sergeant Beaumont then led them towards SCHULER GALLERIES, when he
was shot through the head about 50 yards behind the Red Line. About 16
men under Private Wyre found their way to the Red Line; others, with an
Officer of the King’s Own, went forward on the left. He said he would
take them to the Yellow Line, but was killed by a sniper. They were
willing to go on, but had no leader till Sergeant Knowles of No. 3 came
up and took a small party out under heavy cross-machine gun fire to the
domed strong point on the road.

No. 2 got on all right till Lieutenant Dance was hit in the arm. They
took a small strong point on the right with others helping, and also
helped to take AISNE FARM, where one Hun Officer and eight men were
taken.

Sergeant Knowles took eight men to the left to take the strong point in
the road, but there were about 30 enemy in a trench in front of it, and
he was compelled to fall back again for lack of support. Two sections
helped to take the strong point in front of LOOS.

Captain Baker, Commanding B Company, was wounded at 6 30 a.m., but
continued to advance; he was killed at 7 a.m. at a strong point about
150 yards to the right of LOOS. At this same point five out of the
Lewis gun team of seven were put out of action (one killed and four
wounded). Sergeant-Major Roberts bombed the strong point.

Sergeant Pitcher, of No. 6, with five men, assisted in the attack
on the strong points at LOOS and was severely wounded. Second
Lieutenant Fazackerley, during the pause in the barrage, advanced with
Lance-Corporal Clayton and four men to a point on a ridge to find a
possible position for Lewis gun. Here they were subject to intense
enfilade machine gun fire from the right flank in the direction of
GALLIPOLI, which made it impossible to advance further until the right
flank had advanced.

Second Lieutenant Martin, Commanding No. 11, was badly wounded
immediately after zero, and Sergeant Murphy assumed command. This
Platoon assisted in the capture of AISNE HOUSE; at least 20 Germans
were taken there.

In No. 10 Lance-Corporal Charnley was wounded immediately after zero,
and during the pause Mr. Myers and one or two others were sniped, and
when they moved forward again only one bomber remained.

In No. 9, at nightfall, Mr. Fergie, Mr. Holmes, and two Sergeants went
forward to reconnoitre a forward position. The two Officers were struck
by a shell and were both very badly wounded. Lance-Corporal Anderton
took over command. Private Pendlebury was wounded on the afternoon of
the 23rd for the third time. C Company Commander (Captain Tautz) was
wounded at the first pause.

No. 13, owing to the darkness, got mixed up with the 1/4th King’s Own
on the left flank, and helped the Lancashire Fusiliers to carry SCHULER
GALLERIES.

D Company Headquarters Lewis gun team, when near GALLIPOLI, was shot
down by machine gun fire, but Corporal Prescott retrieved the gun.
Visual communication with the Battalion forward signalling post was
opened from behind a dugout at D 13 b 1 0 by Private Roocroft, Company
Signaller, and Private Parkinson, of B Company, and was maintained
by shutter and lamp until the night of the 21st. On the morning of
the 21st, Corporal Prescott and Private Goodwin, Company Runner, went
forward of the line and shot some enemy snipers who had been annoying
the troops in the line. On the evening of the 23rd, during an intensely
heavy bombardment, Corporal Prescott volunteered and kept observation
all the time, though wounded in the shoulder by shrapnel, and refused
to go to the aid post until the troops were relieved.

No. 14 attacked the strong point at D 13 d 2 6 in conjunction with
a party of the 1/4th King’s Own, then Second Lieutenant Holden and
the remaining men of his party moved to attack GALLIPOLI, which was
holding up the advance. This fight lasted about an hour.

On the 21st September, Second Lieutenant Holden, who was patrolling to
KEIR FARM, was writing a message to send by pigeon when he was killed.
There were four other casualties, and the pigeons were killed.

No. 15. At 10 a.m. on 21st September, Second Lieutenant Pruden took a
small patrol to KEIR FARM. During the night an advanced post held by
Lance-Corporal Gorton and five men with two Lewis guns was buried. One
gun was in action again immediately, and the other after six hours.

       *       *       *       *       *

                       EXTRACTED FROM WAR DIARY.

TRENCHES.

21st September. There was fairly lively shelling at dawn, but the
situation was reported quiet at 7 30 a.m. The front was continually
patrolled before daylight and no signs of the enemy found. During the
morning a further Officers’ patrol worked forward to KEIR FARM and
confirmed the previous report that it was practically non-existent. On
the afternoon of this day the strength of the Companies in the line was
reported at 90, though it was known there were still many more men of
this unit who had become merged in the Battalions on either flank.

At about 4 40 p.m. the 1/8th King’s Liverpool Regiment, on the left of
the 2/5th Lancashire Fusiliers, attacked and occupied SCHULER FARM.
Owing to the small amount of resistance encountered it was decided that
the 2/5th Lancashire Fusiliers should take CROSS COTTS and that then
the 1/4th Loyal North Lancashire Regiment should conform by moving
forward to the new alignment. The attack on CROSS COTTS, however,
never materialised, as at 6 30 p.m. heavy enemy counter-attacks were
launched on Hill 37 on our right, and on the London Division on our
left, the front held by this unit simply being subjected to an intense
bombardment. Our artillery promptly replied to the S.O.S., and no enemy
succeeded in reaching our lines.

During the ensuing night a further effort was made to complete the
reorganisation by separating the 1/4th Royal Lancaster Regiment and the
1/4th Loyal North Lancashire Regiment. This unit took over the south,
viz., 200 yards of the KEIR sector, extending approximately from D 13
d 23 32 to D 13 d 23 75. By this means a few more men were collected
together. The Battalion was then organised on a two-Company frontage
with two Companies in support, and the whole line was straightened and
pushed forward an average depth of 50 yards. It was found that the only
practicable way of doing this was by arranging a system of guide wires
of a fixed length, which were taken out by posts in advance and, after
their direction, etc., had been checked, the rear wave advanced along
them by Platoons and took up the new alignment. It was intended that
this process should be repeated by leap-frogging the two waves until
the YELLOW LINE was reached, but owing to the still imperfect state
of organisation, it was decided to postpone this movement until the
following night.

During this night, however, guide wires were laid from the main line
to the isolated Lewis gun posts 100 yards in front. This ensured
cohesion and gave the most forward men confidence. Guide wires were
also made from the main line of resistance to Battalion Headquarters to
facilitate the work during the night of carrying parties bringing up
S.A.A. and food.

The enemy’s artillery was quiet during the night, but our own was very
busy, apparently with gas shells, upon the enemy’s batteries.

Killed:--Second Lieutenant H. Holden and two Other Ranks.

Wounded:--Two Other Ranks.

22nd September. There was a certain amount of shelling about dawn,
otherwise the day was quiet.

As soon as it was dark, the right of the Battalion was advanced 150
yards and connected with a machine gun in a shell hole near KEIR FARM
about D 13 d 60 55. This movement, which was successfully carried
out with the help of guide wires, brought our line round in such
a way as to face the enemy, whose position now ran approximately
north-west--south-east. Connection was also maintained with the 165th
Brigade on our right, but in view of the fact that the latter were
being relieved, it was not considered advisable to carry out any
further advance, so as to avoid any possibility of bringing down an
enemy S.O.S. barrage.

The usual posts were pushed out in advance of the new line.

Owing to the exhaustion of several Officers in the line, two were
brought down for a rest to Battalion Headquarters, and the Signalling
and Intelligence Officers took over control of the Companies. The night
was quiet. Two Companies of the 2/6th North Staffordshires came into
support to our Brigade.

Casualties:--Two Other Ranks wounded.

23rd September. The day passed without incident. Patrols before dawn
saw nothing of the enemy. An S.O.S. was sent up on our right at 3 50
p.m., but nothing materialised.

At 5 p.m. the enemy heavily bombarded our positions, and our front
line system and the vicinity of Battalion Headquarters were heavily
bombarded for three hours. By 8 15 p.m. all was quiet again and the
relief was begun. The relieving unit was the 2/6th North Staffordshires
(59th Division), who took over our frontage with one Company. Relief
was completed without casualties about 11 p.m.

A special effort was made to secure identifications before being
relieved, and a patrol that went out with this object in view returned
with two prisoners, who were encountered in NO MAN’S LAND. The capture
of these prisoners proved the presence of the third German Division
opposite this part of the line since the attack was launched on the
20th.

Upon relief, Companies concentrated at St. Jean, where, after hot tea
had been supplied from the cookers, a train was provided to take the
Battalion to VLAMERTINGHE.

24th September. The Battalion arrived at camp south of VLAMERTINGHE
at 4 30 a.m. Morning was spent in resting, etc. At 3 p.m. the Brigade
entrained and travelled from VLAMERTINGHE to POPERINGHE, detrained at
POPERINGHE, and boarded ’buses at a point about one mile south-west of
the town. By this means we went to WATOU area, and were accommodated in
tents at Hill Camp (K 12 d 7 8).

143 Other Ranks from reinforcement camp.

11 Other Ranks from base.

       *       *       *       *       *

TELEGRAMS:

“Please convey to all ranks 55th Division the Army Commander’s
congratulations on the fine record of the Division during the hard
fighting of the past two months. The Army Commander wishes specially
to thank all ranks for their splendid efforts, which have contributed
greatly to the success of the last attack and to wish them all good
luck and success in the future. Despite their long period in the line
prior to commencement of operations they have well maintained and
increased their high reputation.

                                                      “FIFTH ARMY.”

“Brigadier-General Stuart and all ranks West Lancashire Reserve Brigade
send heartiest congratulations to West Lancashire Division on their
splendid success.”

“Well done, 55th West Lancashire Division! Accept my most hearty
congratulations. I sincerely trust your losses are not heavy.

                                                           “DERBY.”

       *       *       *       *       *

To All Ranks of the 55th (West Lancashire) Division.

I regret that owing to the move of the Division I have not been able to
see all units since the fight on 20th September. I hope to do so later
as opportunity offers.

The messages received from higher Commanders and others since the
battle have been published from time to time as received and have no
doubt been read by all ranks, who will see from these messages how well
the higher Commanders have appreciated the work of the Division.

In addition, I have recently been allowed to see the reports on the
Division rendered to General Headquarters by the Army and the Corps in
which we served. In these reports the Division is spoken of as “a good
fighting Division possessing the right spirit” and as “a first-rate
Division.” I know that all ranks throughout the Division will share the
pride that I feel myself in reading those opinions of the Commanders
under whom we have served.

I have also had the advantage of reading scores of stories of
individual courage, determination, endurance, and self-sacrifice,
narrated by Commanding Officers in bringing the services of individuals
of all ranks to notice for recognition. These stories increase my pride
in the Division and my confidence in it.

The West Lancashire Division had a good reputation before the recent
fighting in front of Ypres. You have now won for it a reputation second
to none in the Expeditionary Force, and every soldier in the Division
may well be proud of belonging to it. That reputation I feel confident
you will cherish and maintain. We are now in an easy part of the line,
but ordinary trench duties demand constant alertness, endurance, and
conscientious observance of orders; besides it is up to us at all times
to take advantage of any opportunities for aggressive action which will
cause loss or damage to the enemy. It is by such action, as well as
by smartness and good discipline when out of the line, that the great
reputation of the West Lancashire Division can, and I am sure will, be
kept up by each soldier in it, of every rank.

                                      H. S. JEUDWINE,
    55th Division Headquarters,         Major-General,
       10th October, 1917.                Commanding 55th Division.

       *       *       *       *       *

The following decorations were awarded in respect of the battle and
announced on 11th November:--

    MILITARY CROSS   Captain A. T. Houghton.
                     Second Lieutenant S. A. H. Pruden.
                     Second Lieutenant L. Brooke.

    D.C.M.           200051 C.S.M. Roberts, H.
                     200077 Corporal Prescott, S.

    MILITARY MEDAL   200782 Private Parks, T.
                     201197 Corporal Thompson, J.
                     200682 Private Coupe, F.
                     200895 Lance-Sergeant Knowles, R.
                      12154 Lance-Corporal Cayton, R.
                     290665 Private Pendlebury, T.
                     202967 Private Yates, W.
                     291178 Private Goodwin, H.
                     201350 Corporal Robinson, J.
                      29679 Private Parkinson, T.
                      34304 Private Jones, T.
                      16940 Private Cunningham, D.
                     202099 Private Wyre, F.
                     200756 Lance-Corporal Gorton, F.
                     201542 Sergeant Bell, H.
                       6693 Lance-Sergeant Murphey, J.
                     200352 Private Thistleton, T.
                     238002 Private Roocroft, W.




                             CHAPTER VIII.

         CAMBRAI, 25th September, 1917 to 6th December, 1917.


At WATOU we began once more to pull the Battalion together and bring it
up to strength, and reinforcements began to come in. Captain Duggan,
M.C., from the 10th Battalion, joined us here, also Second Lieutenants
J. O. Firth, J. H. Livesey, H. Ramsbottom, and P. Adamson, and 18 Other
Ranks.

On the 26th we marched to HOPOUTRE, where we entrained and moved
out at 9 30 a.m., travelling in cattle trucks via ARRAS to BAPAUME,
where we arrived about 7 p.m. Thence we marched through desolate and
ruined country to a pile of ruins labelled YTRES, where we shared a
canvas camp with a Battalion of the Buffs for the night; they left the
following morning.

Major Crump rejoined us from England on the 30th.

We stayed at YTRES resting, bathing, reorganising, and training, till
3rd October, when we left the 4th Corps area and marched to a canvas
camp at AIZECOURT-LE-BAS in the 3rd Corps area; the camp was on a hill
top, and it was bitterly cold. From here reconnaissances of the new
forward area were carried out, the 164th Brigade being in Divisional
Reserve.

Second Lieutenant Easterby came back on the 5th, and on the 10th
Second Lieutenants J. L., W. H. F., and F. C. Smith, D. Carmichael, J.
E. F. Nicholson, R. B. Wilkinson, and C. Taylor joined us as Officer
reinforcements, followed by Second Lieutenants L. Frost, F. G. Green,
and C. Milne on the 13th.

On the 12th we marched to VILLERS FAUCON into billets; the following
day Companies moved forward to LEMPIRE, where we became support
Battalion to the right Brigade.

The country in which we now found ourselves was a pleasant change from
FLANDERS; the soil was chalk like the south-east of England, and the
scenery was, or had been, similar; but the Germans in their retirement
had systematically destroyed everything--cut down every tree, blown
up every house and structure down to the very telegraph poles, and
poisoned the wells--it was a desolate and dead country. Curiously
enough, he had left the cellars intact, and as these, even under
wattle-and-daub houses, were solidly built of brick, with arched brick
roofs, they made excellent, if rather dark, hiding-places and billets.

We never quite understood these cellars, so much better than the houses
to which they belonged; some said they were specially built as wine
cellars, that being once a wine country; others favoured the theory
that they were specially designed as refuges in war time.

From LEMPIRE, which corresponded to YPRES in this sector, we sent
working parties up the line every night. A Company had four posts,
known as LEMPIRE CENTRAL, LEMPIRE EAST, YAK and ZEBRA POSTS, which were
manned day and night, the garrisons showing no movement during the
daytime.

On the 18th we relieved the 1/4th KING’S OWN in the right Battalion
sub-sector of the Brigade front. The line was in truth no line, but a
string of posts connected by trenches apparently freshly dug in the
stiff clay which here overlay the chalk; each post provided with a
mined dugout for the garrison--rather a pleasant place, we thought, on
first acquaintance, as we were told that horses could be ridden (and
were, just at first) right up to the front line!

On this occasion Companies were disposed as follows:--

GILLEMONT POST, the only place which showed signs of wear, was held
by D Company, with one Platoon of A, as Left Front Company; CAT POST
by C as Right Front Company; DUNCAN and DOLEFUL POSTS by A as Support
Company; and KEN LANE, a sunken road lined with dugouts, by B, the
Reserve Company, and Battalion Headquarters.

Of course, previous to our taking over the sector, the Divisional
artillery had begun to wake up the Hun by concentration shoots, which
were continued at intervals--the retaliation was mostly in the shape of
Minenwerfer on GILLEMONT POST, which reminded us, on that account, of
RAILWAY WOOD.

During the five days we had plenty to do in becoming acclimatised and
establishing the old trench routine again with a new set of Officers
and men; very few were left now of the June lot, and many of the
N.C.O.’s had never seen a trench before. Here Second Lieutenants W.
G. E. Taylor, C. A. Rush, Hornby, and 12 Other Ranks reinforced us.
A perpetual source of joy to the old ones these drafts were; first
they had to be taken down and “put through it,” and then taught how
to behave, if they didn’t know, but somehow or other at the end of a
fortnight, they seemed to have settled down and become part of us.

The 1/4th KING’S OWN relieved us on the 23rd, and we went back to ST.
EMILIE, whence, during the next few days, we provided working parties
for the front line, going into the line again on the 29th, when we
relieved the 1/5th South Lancashires in the BIRDCAGE sector--the relief
was completed without casualties by 8 30 p.m. The Medical Officer, who
had had a pretty stiff time on 20th September, went sick that night,
and Captain E. Watson Williams, R.A.M.C., took over his duties.

On the 30th October the enemy trench-mortared our front line, killing
three and wounding nine men; otherwise the tour was quiet, and on 1st
December we were relieved by the 1/9th King’s Liverpool Regiment and
went by light railway to HAMEL or TINCOURT--it was a double village,
and usually known by this latter name. It was stated above that every
village in the area had been destroyed--this place was an exception, as
some of the civil population had been left there by the Hun, so that we
found it almost intact. The Companies’ billets had wire beds in them,
and we added to these while we were there. Our total strength at this
time was 39 Officers and 777 Other Ranks--the fighting strength
being 24 Officers and 546 Other Ranks, so that in numbers, at any rate,
we had partly recovered from our losses in the SALIENT.

  [Illustration: Map No. 4

  GILLEMONT FARM SECTOR

  November, 1917]

We had a very pleasant time at HAMEL till the 16th, when we returned to
ST. EMILIE; during the period Captain Buckmaster assumed command of B
Company and Second Lieutenant Pruden became Adjutant of the Battalion,
a position he retained till the Armistice. Lieutenant-Colonel Hindle
had been at Brigade since the 13th, commanding the 164th Brigade during
the absence of Brigadier-General Stockwell on leave, afterwards going
on leave himself, and Major Crump had been in command of the Battalion.

On the 16th we moved back to ST. EMILIE, and on the 17th we relieved
the 1/5th King’s Liverpool Regiment in the GILLEMONT sector.

On the morning of the 18th November, the Battalion was disposed as
follows (see map):--

    Front line--D Company, under Lieutenant Shippobottom, in CAT POST.
                C Company, under Lieutenant Lonsdale, in GILLEMONT FARM
                  sector.
    Supports    B Company, under Captain Buckmaster, in DUNCAN and
                  DOLEFUL POSTS.
    Reserve     A Company, under Captain Houghton, in KEN LANE with
                  Battalion Headquarters.

Major Crump was in command of the Battalion, and attached to A Company
was a raiding party of 19 in training for a raid, under Lieutenant
Adamson. At 5 30 a.m. the Boche opened a hurricane bombardment on
the GILLEMONT FARM sector with trench mortars, including 80 heavy
minenwerfer brought up the night before, and reduced the front trench
to a shapeless mass of craters: out of 12 posts[I] only Sergeants
Hartley and Hogg and half-a-dozen men were left alive; all the rest,
with the Officer (Lieutenant Firth) and Sergeant on duty, who were
found at the head of the communication trench under two feet of earth,
were killed and buried.

About 200 Huns entered our line in three places, equipped with spades
and rations, and worked forward bombing, and things looked serious; but
Lieutenant Lonsdale, though badly shaken, kept his head, organised his
Headquarters details into a firing line who held up the enemy advance,
and managed to telephone to Battalion Headquarters, and A Company was
ordered to counter-attack.

The barrage which had been put down on KEN LANE was by this time
falling off, and, as the men were standing to, Lieutenant Adamson
was able to push off at once with his raiders and one Platoon of
A, followed by the rest of A under Captain Houghton, with very few
casualties. As soon as the enemy saw the first wave come over the hill
he began to retreat rapidly, but not before the counter-attackers and
the gallant remnant of C had bayonetted a score or so. Some of the Huns
had entered D Company’s line and caused a few casualties there, among
others Lieutenant Shippobottom, a very promising young Officer, who was
caught by a bomb as he came out of Company Headquarters.

This affair was reported in “THE TIMES” as follows:--

   9 30 p.m.--At dawn this morning a strong hostile raiding party
   attacked our trenches in the neighbourhood of GUILLEMONT FARM,
   south-east of Epehy [north-west of St. Quentin], and effected
   an entry at certain points. Our troops counter-attacked across
   the open, and after sharp fighting, in which we captured a few
   prisoners, ejected the enemy.

Lieutenant Adamson received the M.C. for his excellent leadership--the
way he worked round the flanks of the hill was pretty to watch, and
Sergeants Hartley and Hogg also received the M.M. for their stout fight
with a few men against overwhelming odds.

It fell to A Company to clear up the mess, and they took over the
sector that night; the men were dead beat, the front line blown to
bits, and lateral communication interrupted to such an extent that four
Officers were on duty simultaneously the whole night through.

The following day was spent in making further clearance, and special
parties from Battalion Headquarters and Pioneers carried on through the
night.

The raiders who went to CAT POST did not enter our trenches, but bombed
them from the parapet, doing some damage and causing a few casualties.
They then returned to their own lines.

The enemy left two unwounded prisoners in our hands, two wounded
prisoners, and about ten dead were left in our trenches.

Our casualties were:--Second Lieutenant J. A. Firth, killed; Second
Lieutenant F. Shippobottom, wounded, died of wounds in hospital; Second
Lieutenant R. Hornby, slightly wounded, remained at duty; 11 Other
Ranks killed, 21 Other Ranks wounded, 48 Other Ranks missing--many of
these being buried in the destruction of the trench.

The following extracts from the War Diary refer to our share in the
CAMBRAI attack:--

19th November. The work of reorganisation was completed, and the
repairing of the trenches went on. At 1 p.m. orders were received that
it was Y day, and the preparation for the attack to be made on Z day
started at once. Our artillery and trench mortars completed their wire
cutting programme. Enemy shelled our supports with 5.9’s and 4.2’s
during the day.

D Company, who were holding CAT POST sector, were ordered to remain
there and to push posts into the GILLEMONT sector when the assaulting
troops moved forward.

At 2 30 p.m. A Company sent 50 Other Ranks to the 164th Trench Mortar
Battery as carrying parties for guns moving forward, and 20 Other
Ranks to the 164th Machine Gun Company as carriers to their guns
moving forward. Between 11 p.m. and 12 midnight the remainder of A and
C Companies, who were holding the GILLEMONT sector, were relieved by
the 1/4th Royal Lancaster Regiment, who were to assault the GILLEMONT
defences of the enemy in the morning. On relief these Companies
proceeded to KEN LANE and were held in Battalion reserve.

B Company, who were in support at DUNCAN and DOLEFUL posts, took up
dispositions as follows during the night:--

    One Platoon as permanent garrison FLEECEALL POST.
    One Platoon as permanent garrison GRAFTON POST.
    One Platoon as permanent garrison ISLAND TRAVERSE.

Owing to our losses in Lewis gun personnel, sustained in the raid on
the 18th, we were unable to carry out a programme of Lewis gun fire for
barrage purposes that had been allotted to us. This was taken over by
the 1/5th King’s Liverpool Regiment, with the assistance of two Lewis
gunners from the Platoon of B Company in FLEECEALL POST.

The evening and night was very quiet; there was no enemy activity
whatever.

Two Other Ranks to Field Ambulance sick.

20th November. Z day. At 2 a.m. the Battalion was disposed as follows:--

    Headquarters         KEN LANE.
    D Company            CAT POST SECTOR.
    B Company            Headquarters and one Platoon, FLEECEALL
                             POST; one Platoon, GRAFTON POST;
                             one Platoon, ISLAND TRAVERSE.
    A and C Companies    70 Other Ranks detached as carrying parties;
                             remainder at KEN LANE, with one Platoon
                             organised to occupy DOLEFUL POST if
                             required.
    Aid Post             DUNCAN POST.
    ZERO hour was at 6 20 a.m.

The duty allotted to us was permanently to hold the Brigade front and
on no account to move forward in support of the assaulting Battalions.

The attack on GILLEMONT was at first successful, but by 1 p.m. all our
troops were driven back to our original front line. The attack on the
KNOLL was unsuccessful owing to the wire not having been cut.

Our garrison in the original line stood fast all through.

The enemy heavily shelled our front and support lines, especially
DUNCAN POST, throughout the day and succeeding night.

Our casualties were:--One Other Rank killed, eight Other Ranks wounded,
three Other Ranks missing.

At 8 p.m. the posts at FLEECEALL, GRAFTON, and ISLAND TRAVERSE were
relieved by the 1/8th King’s Liverpool Regiment and 2/5th Lancashire
Fusiliers, and on relief proceeded to DUNCAN POST. At midnight the
entire Company (B) was organised into a wiring party, and commenced
wiring in front of the GILLEMONT sector.

The carrying parties attached to the Trench Mortars and Machine Guns
were returned to A Company at KEN LANE by 10 p.m., except one party of
20 Other Ranks which did not arrive till the 22nd. At 10 p.m. A and C
Companies commenced to relieve the 1/4th Royal Lancaster Regiment in
the GILLEMONT sector.

Two Other Ranks to Field Ambulance sick.

21st November. At 1 p.m. the relief of the 1/4th Royal Lancaster
Regiment was completed. The 1/4th Royal Lancaster Regiment proceeded
to KEN LANE and SART FARM. The day was quiet; the work of clearing
the trenches and reorganising was continued. At 2 p.m. one Platoon B
Company relieved a Company of the 1/5th King’s Liverpool Regiment in
DOLEFUL POST.

22nd November. The day was abnormally quiet. Three daylight patrols
were sent out to discover any signs of an enemy retirement. Enemy
front line was found to be held in force. At 8 p.m. the Battalion
was relieved by the 1/7th King’s Liverpool Regiment, and on relief
proceeded to VAUCELLETTE Camp X 13 c, and came under command of the
B.G.C. 166th Infantry Brigade. C Company did not go to VAUCELLETTE, but
proceeded to billets in ST. EMILIE.

The Battalion was present in billets at VAUCELLETTE Camp by 11 p.m.

Three Other Ranks to Field Ambulance sick.

The next few days were spent in repairing billets and replacing
equipment lost in the recent battle, and on the 28th we marched back to
billets at VILLERS FAUCON; Major Crump left the Battalion to take over
command of the 1/10th King’s Liverpool Regiment.

On the 29th, after a Warning Order, which was afterwards cancelled, we
marched to VAUCELLETTE Camp, just behind the ruins of a farm of that
name. Apparently the Divisional Commander had noticed, while making a
tour of the forward area on the 28th, that the enemy was reconnoitring
with low-flying aircraft as well as registering targets with his
artillery, and knowing that movement behind the enemy’s lines was above
normal, he suspected an attack on our front, hence our move.

In order to make clear the events that followed, which were by no means
clear to us at the time, it is necessary to quote in extenso from the
“History of the 55th Division”:--

“The Division was at this time holding a front of 13,000 yards,
supported only by two Brigades of Field artillery!

“This wide frontage could not of course be continuously held; it
consisted of Platoon posts, connected by travel trenches, and
distributed in depth so far as circumstances allowed. But with such a
wide front an effective distribution in depth was impossible with the
troops available. On the morning of the attack, the portion of the
line extending from BANTEAUX RAVINE to WOOD ROAD was held by the 1/5th
South Lancashires. South of them in the HONNECOURT sector were the
1/5th North Lancashire Regiment, and in the OSSUS sector the 1/10th
King’s Liverpool Regiment. The 1/5th King’s Own were in support. The
165th Infantry Brigade on the right was disposed as follows:--1/6th
King’s Liverpool Regiment from OSSUS WOOD to HEYTHROP POST; 1/5th
King’s Liverpool Regiment from GRAFTON POST to EGO POST; and 1/7th
King’s Liverpool Regiment southwards from this point to CAT POST and
NEW POST. The 1/9th King’s Liverpool Regiment were in support. The
164th Infantry Brigade were in Divisional reserve.

  [Illustration: Map No. 5

          The

  VAUCELLETTE FARM AREA

     Nov. 30th, 1917]

“At seven o’clock on the morning of the 30th, in thick fog, a very
heavy bombardment broke out upon the whole Divisional front, and all
tracks and roads were heavily shelled. Almost simultaneously a message
was received at the Headquarters of the 166th Brigade in EPEHY, from
the 35th Brigade, which was on our immediate left, stating that the
1/5th South Lancashires were being heavily trench-mortared and that
the S.O.S. had gone up. Communication with this Battalion was at once
attempted, but without result, and save for a visual signal message
received at 7 43 a.m. stating, ‘We know nothing yet, O.K.,’ nothing
further was heard from the 1/5th SOUTH LANCASHIRES, nor did a man of
that Battalion return.

“It was presently, however, to be made clear that the enemy had broken
through somewhere on the left of the 1/5th South Lancashires, and was
pushing forward in large numbers and with great rapidity on VILLERS
GUISLAIN. Between 7 38 a.m. and 7 45 a.m., Germans in considerable
force were seen on VILLERS RIDGE, and a few moments later large numbers
of British troops, not of our Division, were seen to be falling
back from the direction of GONNELIEU ... just north-west of VILLERS
GUISLAIN. Very shortly after eight o’clock enemy machine guns were
firing on our batteries from the high ground south of GAUCHE WOOD, and
enemy aeroplanes, flying as low as 100 feet, were subjecting VILLERS
GUISLAIN and the ground in its vicinity to heavy machine gun fire.

“At 8 15 a.m. the enemy were seen to be advancing in strong force
southwards from the north of the cemetery--i.e., on the western side of
VILLERS GUISLAIN. The position of the village was precarious.

“Meantime, as late as 7 57 a.m., the 1/5th North Lancashire Regiment
had reported: ‘No Infantry action,’ but at 8 15 a.m. a message was
received from the Liverpool Scottish on their right, stating that the
enemy was advancing from his trenches at OSSUS 2. A quarter of an hour
later an indistinct message from the 1/5th North Lancashire Regiment
was received at the Headquarters of the 166th Brigade, to the effect
that the enemy was through on the left--the line was then cut.

“By 8 20 a.m. the enemy were reported to have penetrated our lines at
HOLT’S BANK, and a few moments after large bodies of the enemy were
seen in PIGEON QUARRY--north of the Liverpool Scottish and between
them and the 1/5th North Lancashire Regiment. Almost simultaneously
the enemy were reported to be coming over in extended order and in
large numbers, wave after wave, to EAGLE QUARRY, on the 165th Brigade
front, and also to be advancing on FLEECEALL POST on the south. By 9
15 a.m. the enemy had penetrated the Divisional front from the BIRDCAGE
northwards for about 800 yards, and were even reported to have been
seen in GLOUCESTER ROAD. VILLERS GUISLAIN, turned from the north
and eventually surrounded, was reported at 9 30 a.m. to be in enemy
hands, and a little over half an hour later the enemy had succeeded in
progressing to within a few hundred yards of VAUCELLETTE FARM. He got
no further, for there he met the 1/4th Loyal North Lancashires.”

All Press accounts are strangely silent about the work the Battalion
did at VAUCELLETTE FARM on the 30th November, 1917.

The scene of the action was the col or ridge at the head of the valley
which runs along the northern edge of VILLERS GUISLAIN and up towards
the south-east (see map); this ridge commanded the railway for a
considerable distance, and by holding on to it we were able to keep the
Hun off CHAPEL HILL; had he occupied this feature and mounted machine
guns there, most of the area of open grass land between HEUDECOURT and
PEIZIERE would have been under direct fire, with obvious consequences,
whereas its retention by us kept this covered, and also covered the
flank of the Guards when they counter-attacked and drove the Boche back
out of GOUZEAUCOURT.

The front had been very quiet and the possibility of trouble seemed to
most of us very remote, but all precautions were taken, and before we
turned in on the night of the 29th, Colonel Hindle’s orders as to the
issue of bombs, extra bandoliers, haversack rations, and filling of
water-bottles were carried out to the letter. At the same time Company
boxes, gramophones, etc., were with us, and we spent a cheery evening,
with little thought for the morrow.

At dawn the next day heavy firing was heard to the north, but at
first we put this down to the aftermath of the CAMBRAI push and paid
little attention to it; by degrees it increased in violence, and the
Commanding Officer gave the order to stand-to, but carry on with
breakfasts, which were just ready--this was at 7 50 a.m. Soon after he
sent Lieutenant Fazackerley (Intelligence Officer) forward to find out
what was going on, and Lieutenant Johnson to 166th Brigade for orders,
our own Brigade Headquarters and three Battalions being still back at
HAMEL resting.

About 8 30 a.m. information was brought by Lieutenant Fazackerley
that the enemy was advancing all along our immediate front, and the
Commanding Officer at once sent for Company Commanders at the double;
one of us, who knew him well, afterwards said it was the first time the
Commanding Officer had ever been in a hurry. In a few words he made
his dispositions: A Company to hold the left under Captain Houghton;
B Company, under Captain Buckmaster, the centre in front of the farm;
and D Company, under Captain Matthew, to the right at the head of the
LINNET VALLEY. By this time straggling remnants of the Division on our
left were to be seen crossing the railway; a few were collected and
taken forward by A Company.

The Companies standing in readiness were at once led forward by their
Commanders, and took up positions as shown on the map, gaining the
crest at the moment when a party of Huns was in the act of crossing
the railway just south of CHAPEL CROSSING; A Company caught them before
they reached dead ground and wiped them out, while a Lewis gun mounted
on the railway and a Platoon beyond it secured the approach up the
valley. It is difficult to estimate the number of Huns shot down by
this Company alone in the first five minutes--the countryside was alive
with them, advancing in small patrols with light machine guns.

The enemy had also stationed heavy machine guns in various buildings,
especially a Beet Factory to our front, and during the whole action our
troops were subjected to continuous and accurate traversing fire from
these, and to a certain amount of shelling.

From this point our War Diary will speak for itself:--

30th November, 7 40 a.m. “Stand-to” order received from 166th Infantry
Brigade. Intelligence Officer and scouts sent forward to reconnoitre.

9 a.m. Our infantry and artillery observed retiring on our left in
the direction of HEUDECOURT. Artillery reported they had abandoned
guns in VILLERS GUISLAIN. Battalion Headquarters, under R.S.M., sent
forward to form line on north-east side of VAUCELLETTE FARM, where they
immediately came under machine gun fire from the enemy advancing from
VILLERS GUISLAIN.

A Company were ordered up on their left, and had to fight hard to reach
their position; the enemy had already seized Chapel Crossing. All the
Officers of this Company eventually became casualties.

B and D Companies were ordered to continue the line on the right of
Headquarters on the east side of VAUCELLETTE FARM. All Companies were
quickly in position; fire was opened, and the enemy ceased to advance
and took up a position on a line running from the BEET FACTORY to
CHAPEL CROSSING. At the time there were no troops in position on our
right or left flanks. This state of things prevailed until dusk, when
the Canadian Mounted Brigade arrived.

11 a.m. Orders were received from the 166th Infantry Brigade to clear
enemy from VILLERS GUISLAIN. Battalion ordered to advance in extended
order to clear enemy from VILLERS HILL. This they proceeded to do, led
by Lieutenant-Colonel R. Hindle, D.S.O.

The men were firing from the hip as they advanced, and the foremost
line of the enemy began to retire. The advance was successful until the
centre of the line reached a point about 200 yards from the crest of
the hill, when ammunition ran short. At this time fresh enemy troops
advanced over the hill in considerable strength.

The Colonel was killed, and all three Company Commanders became
casualties. The Adjutant took command of the Battalion and ordered a
withdrawal to VAUCELLETTE FARM. This was carried out slowly, under
covering fire from the left flank.

A defensive line was established on the east side of VAUCELLETTE FARM,
and the men commenced to dig themselves in with their entrenching
tools, under cover of Lewis gun fire. A supply of ammunition was
brought up by stretcher-bearers returning from the Aid Post.

11 30 a.m. At this time Major Crump, who was reconnoitring under orders
from the G.O.C. (166th Infantry Brigade) established a post on the
EPEHY--VILLERS--GUISLAIN ROAD, consisting of one Vickers gun and team,
one Officer and 30 Other Ranks of various units. The gun in this post
did great execution amongst the enemy in LEITH WALK, and effectually
prevented him from advancing further.

12 15 p.m. A composite Battalion of the 12th Division arrived as
reinforcements, one Company being sent to strengthen our garrison in
front of the farm, two Companies continued our line northwards, and one
Company was kept in the camp as local reserve. Touch was obtained on
the left with the 9th Essex Regiment.

12 55 p.m. Major Crump having completed reconnaissance and reported to
166th Infantry Brigade, was ordered by the G.O.C. to assume command
of the Battalion and to take with him two Vickers guns and teams and
supply of ammunition for LONE TREE POST (EPEHY--VILLERS--GUISLAIN
ROAD). One gun was sent to right flank of the post to command the
LINNET VALLEY, the other to VAUCELLETTE FARM. Soon afterwards touch was
obtained with 1/4th Royal Lancaster Regiment on our right.

1 30 p.m. C Company arrived as reinforcements and were sent into
the trench south of the farm, in front of the railway. After this
the consolidation of the line was carried on by the men with the
entrenching tool, only a few picks and shovels being available. This
was eventually remedied by the arrival of the Battalion mobile reserve
of S.A.A. and tools, so that, with the help of the composite Battalion
(12th Division), a fire trench was dug across the whole front of the
farm, and a considerable amount of wire put out soon after dark.

5 p.m. The Canadian Cavalry Brigade, under Brigadier-General Seeley,
arrived at rear line of VAUCELLETTE Camp. One regiment dismounted
and reinforced our line. One Regiment dug a support line west of the
farm. C Company were relieved at 11 p.m. by the 1/8th King’s Liverpool
Regiment, and went into the line east of the farm to assist in the
consolidation of the position.

    Our casualties were:--Killed: Lieutenant-Colonel R. Hindle,
                              D.S.O.; Second Lieutenant J. H. Livesey.
                          Wounded and Missing (afterwards reported
                              killed): Captain R. N. L. Buckmaster.
                          Wounded: Captain A. T. Houghton, M.C.; Captain
                              F. K. Matthew, Second Lieutenant E. M.
                              Easterby, Second Lieutenant R. B.
                              Wilkinson,
                              Second Lieutenant P. Adamson, Second
                              Lieutenant F. G. Green, Second Lieutenant
                              J. E. P. Nicholson.
                          Other Ranks: Killed 11, Wounded 84, Missing
                              15.

Writing to express his sympathy with Alderman R. Hindle, Chorley,
on the loss of his son, the late Lieutenant-Colonel Hindle, D.S.O.,
Major-General H. S. Jeudwine said:--

“Lieutenant-Colonel Hindle’s death was a great blow to all of us. To
his Battalion it seemed irreparable. His never-failing keenness, his
courage and determination, were of inestimable value, and had made his
Battalion one of the finest, if not the finest, in the Division. His
cheerfulness and modesty endeared him to everybody. His Battalion did
splendid work under his leadership in the attack in front of Ypres.
There he came safely through great dangers, though he never spared
himself.

“The last action was quite unforeseen,” the letter continues. “When
the German attack appeared probable it fell to him and his Battalion
to occupy a position of great importance. I saw him on the day
preceding the attack and gave him orders which he carried out most
loyally, as I had the utmost confidence he would. He was killed almost
instantaneously at the head of his men, where he always was when there
was danger.... It will, I am sure, be some consolation to you to
know that the fine fight he made with his Battalion was the means of
definitely checking the German advance in that part of the field, and
of preventing their reaching a position which would have endangered
large forces.”

VAUCELLETTE CAMP.

1st December. At 1 a.m. the Battalion was relieved by the composite
Battalion of the 12th Division, and on relief went into Brigade
reserve at the railway dugouts (W 23 b) 57 c S E. The day was spent in
reorganising the Battalion. At 11 p.m. the Battalion was relieved by
the King’s Own Yorkshire Light Infantry, and proceeded by route march
to billets at HAMEL, arriving at 3 a.m.

Second Lieutenant J. Johnson wounded. One Other Rank to Field Ambulance
sick.

Extract from a letter received by the G.O.C. 164th Infantry Brigade
from the G.O.C. 55th Division:--“I saw the Corps Commander to-day, and
he said that they (i.e., the 1/4th Loyal North Lancashire Regiment) had
saved the situation. He had seen the Commander-in-Chief, and he had
agreed.”




                              CHAPTER IX.

   THE GIVENCHY PERIOD, 7th DECEMBER, 1917, to 3rd SEPTEMBER, 1918.


On the 6th December, 1917, the remnant of the Battalion marched back
from TINCOURT to Canvas Camp, FLANICOURT, arriving there at 12 30 p.m.

The next day we spent in putting up more tents and cleaning up. Captain
Duggan, M.C., and Captain Hore, M.C., rejoined us from England and 22
Other Ranks from the reinforcement camp.

On the 8th we entrained at 10 a.m. and were taken to MAROEUIL, and
marched in pouring rain to billets at LATTRE ST. QUENTIN, arriving
there at 2 30 a.m., where we rested all the following day.

On the 10th we marched to TINCQUES, and the following day to BRYAS.

On the 11th we marched to HENCHIN, and the following day to DELETTE,
where 11 Other Ranks reported as reinforcements. Here we entered on a
long course of training.

On the 22nd news came that Lieutenant-Colonel J. A. Crump had been
mentioned in despatches.

On Christmas Day, after Church Parade, we had a splendid Battalion
Dinner in the local hall and a concert in the evening.

Snow fell on the 26th and interfered with training.

Our total casualties for the year 1917 are recorded in the War Diary as
follows:--

                                        Wounded &      Died of Sick to
                Killed Wounded Missing  Missing Gassed Wounds  to F.A.
    Officers      14     31        2       2      0      1       19
    Other Ranks  137    627      159       0     11      1      520
                 ---    ---      ---       -     --      -      ---
      Totals     151    658      161       2     11      2      539

JANUARY, 1918.

On New Year’s Day we found ourselves still at DELETTE, where we had
an excellent dinner. Congratulations were received from the King, the
Commander-in-Chief, the Army Commander, and the Divisional Commander.
The following days were spent in Company training and bathing. There
was a snowstorm on the 8th. There were good ranges here, and one of the
Companies was on the range every day.

  [Illustration: W.O.s and N.C.O.s, DELETTES, 1918.]

On the 14th the New Year’s Honours List came out. The Military
Cross for Captain Matthew; Captain Buckmaster, Corporal J. Collier,
Lance-Corporal J. Baker, and Private J. Maher being mentioned in
despatches. Second Lieutenant Ramsbottom joined us as a reinforcement.

On the 19th the Brigade was inspected at COYAQUE by the Army Commander,
General Horne, who took the opportunity of welcoming the Brigade to his
Army. The following Officers joined for duty:--Captain T. D. Collett,
Second Lieutenants H. A. Latham, J. Dawson, W. Hughes, N. Smith, and T.
Stanley.

On the 20th the award of a Bar to the Military Cross to Captain Pruden
and the Military Cross itself to Second Lieutenant H. Fazackerley were
announced.

There were regular lectures during the period on a variety of subjects,
and many keen football matches were played.

On the 25th another batch of Officers--Lieutenant G. B. Wardle and
Second Lieutenants O. R. Cooper, R. Hodgson, G. H. Frost, E. H.
Studdard, and L. O. Halliwell--joined us, followed, on the 30th, by
a draft from the 1/5th North Lancashires, consisting of:--Captains
R. W. B. Sparkes, M.C., and B. J. Phillips, Second Lieutenants J. S.
Hampson, T. H. Scott, W. E. Pasley, J. H. Friar, F. Greaves, A. James,
T. McLachlan, M.C., J. T. Taylor, and 163 Other Ranks.

On the 31st the total strength of the Battalion was 56 Officers
(including the Medical Officer and the Padre) and 942 Other Ranks,
there being actually 43 Officers and 631 Other Ranks serving with the
Battalion.

Two more Officers, Second Lieutenants Beresford and Horsfall, and two
Other Ranks arrived on the 2nd February, and Second Lieutenants Symes
and G. Haworth came on the 3rd, Second Lieutenant R. Smith on the 4th,
and Second Lieutenants G. Kirkby and H. Bailey on the 6th.

We had never been so strong in numbers since the battle of FESTUBERT,
and the rest and daily training had improved our morale, so that when
we moved away from DELETTE on the 7th February we presented a very
different spectacle to the handful of survivors who had mustered after
the VAUCELLETTE FARM affair at the end of November, 1917.

Esprit-de-corps is a wonderful thing, and has been noticed by many
people during the war. Officers and men rejoining their Companies after
perhaps two years’ absence would find awaiting them the same Company
they had left, although perhaps no Officer and only half-a-dozen men
remained of it, and though on this date the Commanding Officer was the
only Officer still present who had left England with the Battalion, and
there were probably not more than 20 of the originals with him, yet in
some indefinable way the Battalion was the same one. Not perhaps so
thoroughly grounded in some ways as it originally had been, but with
all the cumulative experience of three years of war governing its every
move.

On the 7th February, escorted by the Divisional Band (which was
generally considered an ominous sign), we marched to ESTREE-BLANCHE,
and arrived there very wet about 12 noon. Six men were sent to Field
Ambulance sick.

The following day we marched on to CANTRAINNE, arriving there at 3
p.m., again very wet, and on the 9th on to FONGUIERES, where all were
present and billeted by 1 p.m.

Sunday was devoted to Church Parade and cleaning up, the strength of
the Battalion being recorded as 51 Officers and 708 Other Ranks. Second
Lieutenant P. Adamson, M.C., rejoined us here.

The next three days were spent in training and preparations for the
trenches and reconnaissance of the forward area, in this case the LA
BASSEE CANAL sector.

On the 14th we relieved the 1/8th Lancashire Fusiliers by daylight.
Companies marching via BETHUNE and the canal bank. Relief was completed
by 4 30 p.m.

Here we found civilians living in the “village line,” and small shops!
Our dispositions were on a different principle to those which obtained
at YPRES, all Companies being in the front line, in the order, from
right to left--C, B, A, and D, each Company being disposed in depth.
C Company was on the south of the canal, the remainder on the north.
Battalion Headquarters was at KINGSCLEARE.

Here we took up again the old trench routine, nightly patrols, working
on the trenches, and so forth.

The position itself was a curious one. GIVENCHY, the scene of so much
desperate fighting in 1914, was a village completely destroyed, some
few remnants of walls and a mass of bricks, the remains of a large
church, being all that remained of a fair-sized village; it lay on the
western slopes of a small knoll, which formed the southern and western
extremity of the FROMELLES--AUBERS ridge. The opposing trenches had
been dug in 1914, so that the actual crest of the knoll was in No Man’s
Land, and the opposing trench lines were out of sight of one another.

In the intervening years of warfare, GIVENCHY had been one of the most
active mining centres on the British front, with the result that by the
time the 55th Division took over, the front line on the crest of the
knoll consisted of a continuous line of craters 800 yards long.

Both sides occupied the high tops of the craters, but the view was
practically limited by the top of the crater opposite. The position was
one of great importance--if the Germans gained possession of the whole
of GIVENCHY HILL they would command the whole of LA BASSEE CANAL from
where it passed through our lines to BETHUNE, as well as a large area
in close proximity to what remained to France of its great northern
coalfield.

The country to the north of the spur was dead flat for miles, and the
roads were all overlooked from the crest of the hill. Every effort had
been made to strengthen the position by the construction of a series
of tunnels for shelter during bombardments, but the exits from these
were not of the best. A certain amount of cementing had also been done.
By April 9th the GIVENCHY--FESTUBERT area was a mass of apron fencing
stretching back in depth for several thousand yards.

  [Illustration: Map No. 6

  GIVENCHY AREA

  April, 1918]

The dangers of this tunnel system and the difficulties of negotiating
the mass of wire in this area necessitated careful practice in the
action of the troops holding it. Posts were manned daily from the
tunnel system, this action being timed and every Officer, N.C.O., and
man thus learnt his way about the whole system of defence.

The action of the Battalion in support was definitely laid down. No
counter-attack across the open was to be made on account of the number
of apron fences; in the event of the enemy penetrating at any point
into the line, further penetration was to be stopped by the supports,
and when the enemy was pocketed he was to be cut off by movement along
the trench system against his flanks and rear. All posts and strong
points were wired in all round, and had orders to fight to the last
even if surrounded. All this careful preparation bore fruit later, on
April 9th, which was, as a battle, a most remarkable example of the
value of taking the British soldier into your confidence and making him
understand _why_ he was ordered to do something.

On the 15th, seven Other Ranks joined us as reinforcements.

On the 17th, at 3 15 a.m., a silent raiding party of enemy rushed
the crater post of D Company, under cover of smoke bombs. The enemy
were quickly ejected, and left two dead in our lines. Our casualties
were:--Second Lieutenant Westwood and two Other Ranks wounded, three
Other Ranks missing.

The next day we hit back, sending a patrol into the enemy’s front line,
who searched it for 200 yards without finding anybody. The attempt was
repeated on the following day, and an enemy wiring party was rushed.

On the 20th the 1/4th King’s Own relieved us by daylight, and we moved
into support, Headquarters and A, B, and C Companies being in the
village line and D Company in LE PREOL. The following days were quiet,
and we were busy repairing the defences. Seven men went sick.

On the 25th we relieved the 2/5th Lancashire Fusiliers in the right
sector, by daylight, the dispositions being similar but Companies from
right to left being--D, B, C, and A. Our patrols found enemy machine
gun fire very active. Second Lieutenant W. H. F. Smith went to Field
Ambulance sick.

The following day was quiet, and at night our patrols were very active
trying to get into the enemy’s lines to secure a prisoner. Ultimately
the enemy got so “windy” that they sent up their S.O.S., and their
barrage came down on our support lines. After 40 minutes’ retaliation
by our guns everything became normal. Second Lieutenant James-Alfred
was wounded. Thirty-two Other Ranks reinforcements joined us.

The next day was quiet, but the night was lively, four patrols being
in No Man’s Land searching for enemy all night. From enemy machine gun
fire we had the misfortune to lose Second Lieutenant Adamson, M.C., who
was killed. Second Lieutenant Hulme was sent to Field Ambulance sick.

On the 28th there was the usual amount of artillery activity during the
day. At 7 30 p.m. a raiding party, consisting of Second Lieutenants
Taylor and Cooper and 28 Other Ranks, raided an enemy machine gun post
but found it empty, and could not penetrate further owing to machine
gun fire.

On March 21st the long-expected attack against the Allied front
commenced. The 5th Army, on the right of the 3rd Army, were driven
back, and the enemy almost reached AMIENS. In order to fill the hole
thus made, the 1st and 2nd Armies were denuded of reserves, and as
a direct result of this the 164th Brigade, which was in Divisional
reserve, was constantly being rushed up to points of concentration
at night in case the Boche attacked, and all ranks learnt thoroughly
to dislike the code word “Bustle.” On about April 1st, at the Corps
Headquarters, it was decided that the Division must risk all on the
line GIVENCHY--FESTUBERT, supporting Battalions of Brigades being close
up behind their battle line. The establishment of the main line of
defence on the line of FESTUBERT VILLAGE made the position of GIVENCHY
difficult, as the line of defence of the right Brigade holding the
position was 800 yards in front of the left Brigade.

THE BATTLE OF GIVENCHY.

At about 7 a.m. on the 9th April, in thick fog which made observation
impossible, the enemy appears to have attacked the left brigade of
the 2nd Portuguese Division in strength and to have broken into their
trenches.

Shortly after 7 a.m. an attack had developed on the right Brigade of
the 40th Division, and soon afterwards the attack opened on our front.
Map No. 7 is a copy of the German map which was captured by us in
the course of the battle, from which the German plan can be clearly
gathered.

The 164th Infantry Brigade was holding GIVENCHY, with the 1/4th Royal
Lancaster Regiment on the right and the 1/4th North Lancashire Regiment
on the left, 2/5th Lancashire Fusiliers in support with three Companies
in the Village line (a continuation of the FESTUBERT line) and one
Company and Headquarters at GORRE, some distance back. On the left of
the 164th Infantry Brigade, the 165th Infantry Brigade held the Village
line (FESTUBERT) in strength; north of the 55th Division were the
Portuguese; the 166th Infantry Brigade was in Divisional reserve; south
of the canal the 1st Division held the line. The 164th Infantry Brigade
and the 165th Infantry Brigade were covered by the 276th and the 275th
Artillery Brigades, or rather groups.

The amount of artillery available was not great for the frontage to be
covered. At 4 15 a.m. the enemy opened a heavy bombardment, reaching as
far back as GORRE; this was largely a gas bombardment, but all reports
showed that no mustard gas was being used, which was suspicious, as
previous experiences further south had shown that, when the enemy
really intended to attack, he did not use mustard gas for fear of
getting into it himself.

At this time the front line Companies reported by wire that the
situation was normal, but that all ranks were standing to. The morning
was extremely foggy, the limit of vision being about 30 yards at the
best. About 5 a.m. the code word “Bustle” was received from Brigade,
and at 6 a.m. a very heavy bombardment of our front line system
commenced--some of the heaviest shelling ever experienced by the
Battalion.

  [Illustration: Map No. 7--Facsimile of German Map,
  showing Plan of Attack, Captured April 9th, 1918]

The enemy’s procedure so far had been exactly the same as that used
against the 5th Army on March 21st. The shelling of the front line
system increased in intensity, many trench mortars being in action.

At 8 45 a.m. the front line Companies reported that the enemy was
advancing, and the S.O.S. went up from the Companies and Battalion
Headquarters (SOUTHMOOR VILLA), though doubts were freely expressed
as to the rockets being seen on account of the thick fog, which was
accentuated by the smoke and dust of the bombardment; they were seen,
however, and the artillery and machine gun barrages opened promptly.
From this time onwards till midnight savage fighting went on in the
front line system.

The German Divisional orders, captured during the course of the day,
showed that the 4th Ersatz Division, which had been made up to strength
and re-equipped, had been brought into the line for the purpose of
making this attack. This Division had been specially selected for this
attack, as it had for many months held the GIVENCHY--FESTUBERT front
and was supposed to know the ground well. It was strengthened with
storm-troops and heavy machine guns. The general plan was to attack the
GIVENCHY salient on the flanks, striking towards WINDY CORNER on the
north, and forwards and through SPOIL BANK to PONT FIXE on the south;
each of these attacks was to be carried out by one Regiment of three
Battalions, strengthened with storm-troops and heavy machine guns.

On reaching the objectives WINDY CORNER and PONT FIXE, these two
attacks were to join hands, and thus cut off the main GIVENCHY position.

No direct frontal attack was to be made across the craters, but machine
guns were to be mounted on the commanding crests which were to engage
the garrison while the encircling attacks were in progress.

One Battalion of the northern attack had orders on gaining the position
WINDY CORNER-LE PLANTIN SOUTH to turn north along the FESTUBERT VILLAGE
line and clean up in co-operation with an attack by one Battalion of
the Reserve Regiment.

As soon as these actions had been successful, a general advance was to
be made on GORRE.

The attacking Boche had been carefully instructed that “the 55th
Division is a tired Division, only fit to hold a quiet section of the
line.” Before nightfall he found out his mistake. Owing to the thick
fog and the amount of wire, the fighting from the commencement of the
Boche attack until the afternoon consisted of isolated fights carried
on all over the area by small parties of Officers and men, but all
acting on a preconceived plan.

The garrisons of the strong points located the enemy by means of
patrols, so that when the fog lifted at about 11 a.m. they instantly
opened heavy fire with rifles and machine guns.

The enemy succeeded in getting into one half of the concrete pill box
in CAVAN LANE, but the crew fought him through the gas curtain while
the machine gun continued its fire northwards with excellent results,
until a counter-attack, led by Captain Lonsdale, M.C., from BUNNY HUTCH
tunnel entrance, freed the crew.

The enemy actually entered our lines at several places, notably
GIVENCHY KEEP, PICCADILLY TRENCH, WARE ROAD, MOAT FARM, BATTALION
HEADQUARTERS, HITCHEN ROAD, and WINDY CORNER, but he was very quickly
driven out, except at GIVENCHY KEEP, BATTALION HEADQUARTERS, and WINDY
CORNER; the situation at these three points was not really satisfactory
until after mid-day.

The enemy’s northern attack failed to take any strong points covering
the north flank of the GIVENCHY salient; it did succeed in taking LE
PLANTIN SOUTH and in penetrating into WINDY CORNER, but was then held
up by the garrison and Battalion Headquarters details in HERTS REDOUBT
and SOUTHMOOR VILLA.

The enemy looted the Divisional Canteen and established his Battalion
Headquarters there, thus being immediately in rear of the Battalion
sector. A counter-attack by the 165th Infantry Brigade re-took LE
PLANTIN SOUTH, and a local counter-attack organised by Battalion
Headquarters, restored the situation at WINDY CORNER, but not before
the enemy had captured our Aid Post and some 50 prisoners, including
the Padre, and had sent small patrols forward toward LONE FARM, who,
however, were destroyed by our advanced 18-pounders, which blew them to
pieces at close range, bits of Boche being scattered on the trees and
hedges in the vicinity.

Ultimately the German Battalion Commander and 120 Boches were captured
in HITCHEN ROAD. These men were all found to be loaded with the
contents of our Divisional Canteen; needless to say, they were quickly
relieved of their loot.

The Boche continued to press his troops forward into the angle between
GIVENCHY HILL and the LE PLANTIN--FESTUBERT LINE, suffering very
severe losses from our heavy and continuous fire on his flanks; in
many instances his own machine guns, manned by our Lewis gunners, were
turned against him with excellent results. He could get no further and
was completely disorganised by the fog and wire, and the situation on
this flank became stabilised for the moment. The 1/4th King’s Own, who
were holding the right sector of the Brigade front, had suffered very
heavy losses from the preliminary bombardment, owing to the lack of
shell-proof cover, the trench system having been practically destroyed.

The enemy, advancing over the flat between the southern crater and the
canal, overran the main line of defence, but failed to take the most
advanced sap, “Death or Glory,” situated on the bank of the canal.
The garrison of this sap, consisting of one Platoon, about 18 strong
(of the 1/4th King’s Own), maintained a heavy enfilade fire on the
advancing enemy, causing him very heavy casualties. Though cut off for
five hours, this garrison most gallantly held its position, and later
in the day sallying forth, captured a machine gun and crew.

Despite the losses incurred from “Death or Glory” sap, the Boche
pushed on and captured ORCHARD KEEP, the garrison of which had been
destroyed by shell fire, and penetrated into GUNNERS’ SIDING, at its
junction with the main communication trench, ORCHARD ROAD. He, however,
failed to take either MARIE KEEP to the north or SPOIL BANK KEEP to
the south. His further progress beyond GUNNERS’ SIDING was checked by
supports pushed up by the 2/5th Lancashire Fusiliers. His endeavours
to push north of GUNNERS’ SIDING were checked by the few men of the
garrison and the anti-tank 18-pounder gun in the trench. This gun,
though damaged by shell fire to such an extent that the breach had to
be opened with a pick, fired no fewer than 150 rounds at a range of 200
yards at the enemy. Time after time the enemy tried to rush it across
the open or along the trench, but were beaten off by the infantry
covering the gun.

At about 10 45 a.m. the situation had stabilised on the front of our
Brigade, and was as follows:--

A large number of the enemy were in the low ground in the angle
between the north face of the GIVENCHY salient and the LE PLANTIN
SOUTH-FESTUBERT line. Another large force were on the flat plateau
between MARIE KEEP, GUNNERS’ SIDING, SPOIL BANK KEEP, and DEATH
AND GLORY SAP. In other words, the enemy were divided into two,
and contained in two deep pockets. At 11 a.m. the fog cleared, and
there was a very marked increase in the rifle and machine gun fire,
as all along the front small parties of troops, acting on their own
initiative, began at once to attack the nearest Boche in flank and
rear, forcing him to maintain his position in the pockets.

Orders were then issued to push every available man up to close the
mouths of the two pockets. The forces available were divided into two
parties, the northern of which was to seize GRENADIER ROAD, thereby
closing the mouth of the northern pocket and cutting off all the enemy
in it.

This force acted with great vigour, and not only gained GRENADIER
ROAD, but also re-took the commanding saps on the northern craters,
giving valuable observation over the flat ground to the north and the
approaches to the Portuguese front.

The southern force (“King’s Own” and Lancashire Fusiliers) was
ordered to move up CHEYNE WALK, regain the front line, and then move
northwards, closing the mouth of the southern pocket.

This force succeeded in freeing DEATH AND GLORY SAP and regaining the
main line of defence, but could not regain its crater posts owing to
the complete destruction of the trenches leading to them.

These movements commenced at 11 30 a.m., and were covered by a
concentrated barrage fire by our artillery on CANAL RESERVE, in which
the enemy were believed to have their reserves massed. During the
progress of the operations no enemy supports came up, and direct
evidence is now available that this was due to the artillery barrage.

It will be remembered that early in the morning about 50 Officers
and men were captured by the enemy round the First Aid Post at WINDY
CORNER, among them being the Rev. L. N. Forse, Chaplain to the 4th
Loyal North Lancashire Regiment. This Officer was many weeks in
Germany, and on his return to the Brigade on release stated that he
and ten other prisoners were taken off by the Boche to one of the
trenches north of the craters. The ground in this area was covered with
enemy dead, and our rifle and machine gun fire was very heavy. Later
the party were moved southwards behind the craters, making for CANAL
RESERVE trench. At about 11 30 a.m. the party were thirty yards or so
from the trench, which was packed with about 500 enemy massed three
deep. Our barrage opened and fell right in the trench, doing tremendous
execution, unfortunately knocking out 23 of the Chaplain’s party. After
half an hour the barrage ceased, and the remnants of the party made for
the trench, but found it quite impossible to move along it owing to
the Boche dead in it. The massed enemy reserves appeared to have been
completely destroyed by our artillery fire.

The mouths of the pockets being closed and the enemy surrounded, it was
only a matter of time before he was forced to surrender in groups.

There were many acts of bravery on the part of individual Officers and
men, and many honours were won.

The outstanding features of the action were: (_a_) absolute
preparedness for action, (_b_) the sending out of scouts to locate
the enemy, (_c_) the prompt initiative shown by all ranks, which was
responsible for the breaking up of the enemy’s attack and his complete
defeat.

By 3 45 p.m. we had regained the whole of our defensive system, with
the exception of the saps on the southern craters. As soon as darkness
came on, an attack was organised by the Royal Lancaster Regiment to
recover the crater saps in their area. This was very successful, a
large number of prisoners being taken.

At 2 45 a.m. on April 10th, the Brigadier was able to inform the
Division that the Brigade held its line intact, including the forward
saps, as it had been held on April 8th.

During the afternoon of April 9th two Companies of the South Lancashire
Regiment came up, one being allotted to each Battalion in the line. The
Company allotted to the 4th Loyal North Lancashire Regiment was posted
in GRENADIER ROAD, with one Platoon at LE PLANTIN SOUTH, and they did
yeoman service in relieving our tired men.

Throughout April 9th the action of our artillery had been admirable.
Two 18-pounder batteries of the 11th Division which could fire on
our front were handed over to the Brigade, and two heavy batteries
belonging to the Corps placed themselves under the orders of the
Brigade.

As soon as darkness permitted, all guns north of the canal were
withdrawn south of the canal, and the guns came out of their
emplacements and took up positions in the open.

The 165th Infantry Brigade had maintained its main line intact, but
had given up its advanced posts. No touch could be obtained with the
Portuguese on the left, and early in the morning of April 10th the
enemy were pushing through clear of and north of the 165th Infantry
Brigade.

The 165th threw back its left flank at right angles, the defensive
flank being continued by all units of the Division.

After 4 p.m. the rest of the day was spent in reorganising the posts
and mopping up the few remaining enemy left in the sector. Our
communication trenches were continuously shelled. At about 4 p.m. B
Company, 1/5th South Lancashires, came up as reinforcements and manned
our left flank from NEW CUT to WINDY CORNER.

Our casualties were:--

    OFFICERS--Killed: Second Lieutenant L. Brooke, M.C.
              Wounded: Second Lieutenant R. E. Horsfall, G. C. Horner,
                  C. Haworth, and P. B. Beresford.
              Missing: Chaplain L. N. Forse (prisoner of war) and
                  Lieutenant W. H. Jenkins, Medical Officer.
    OTHER RANKS--Killed 43, Wounded 100, Missing 50.

No further attacks were made on our front.

On the 10th, although enemy guns and aeroplanes were very active, an
attempt was made to clear out the trenches and bury the dead.

Captain A. A. Turner, R.A.M.C., reported for duty as Medical Officer.

Captain Collett was wounded on the 11th by enemy shelling, which was
heavy, especially on Headquarters in the afternoon and a barrage on our
lines at 6 p.m.

Second Lieutenant Vincent, M.C., was wounded by artillery fire on the
12th.

During the 10th and subsequent days, the artillery with the 164th
Infantry Brigade played a big role in breaking up many enemy
concentrations against the thrown-back flank. The enemy was unable to
move his men forward without coming under the observation, and very
often the close fire of, our northern posts and flanks.

Thus ended a highly-successful action, in which the Battalion played an
important part. Had the day gone against the Division, the Allies might
have had to abandon the Pas de Calais. A glance at the map will show
the seriousness of such a step.

The Brigade continued, despite heavy artillery bombardment, to hold the
line until the Division was relieved by the 1st Division.

During the action of the 9th of April, and the night of the 9th and
10th, the following casualties were incurred by the Brigade:--Killed,
wounded, and missing: 35 Officers, 659 Other Ranks.

The enemy lost about 600 killed in our lines and NO MAN’S LAND. No
estimate can, however, be made of his casualties in his own lines,
but, judging from the reports of returned prisoners of war, these were
exceptionally heavy.

The following captures were made:--Prisoners: 641, including many
Officers and two Battalion Commanders; 100 light and heavy machine
guns, and one Regimental Band. In addition, on April 11th, an Austrian
artillery Officer was killed on the Red Dragon Crater, and the
identifications obtained from him were the first direct evidence of the
presence of Austrians on the Western Front. A very fine range-finding
instrument was captured at the same time. This instrument was presented
by the Battalion to the West Lancashire Field Artillery.

  [Illustration: The Remnant of GIVENCHY KEEP, 1920.]

On the 13th the communication trenches were practically cleared of
blocks. The keeps were heavily shelled in the afternoon. Fourteen men
arrived from the reinforcement camp.

On the 14th enemy artillery was still very active, and all preparations
were made to meet further attacks.

On the 15th the enemy annoyed us by persistent harassing fire
throughout the day.

Second Lieutenant Westwood was killed and one Other Rank wounded.

The new Padre, Captain R. R. Schofield, arrived.

On the 16th, amidst active enemy artillery fire, the 1st Black Watch
relieved us, the relief being completed with three casualties. We
marched back to BEUVRY, where we em-’bussed and were taken to LOZINGHAM.

Captain Hore, M.C., went to England sick, and Second Lieutenant E. M.
Studdart to Field Ambulance.

127 Other Ranks arrived from reinforcement camp.

The Battalion was not billeted until 4 a.m.

The next few days were spent in reorganising and training. Captain
Carmichael and Second Lieutenants Greaves and Taylor and five Other
Ranks going sick.

On the 22nd we went en masse to the Divisional Theatre.

On the 23rd we em-’bussed at 7 a.m. for VAUDRICOURT, where we arrived
at 9 30 a.m.

An advance party was sent to take over the Support Battalion area of
the GIVENCHY sector. A “B team” of seven Officers and 110 Other Ranks
went to VURBURE. We em-’bussed again at 8 p.m. and went to ARMEGUIN,
whence we marched to relieve the 1st Northamptons in support.

C Company were at WINDY CORNER and D Company at PONT FIXE, A, B, and
Headquarters being on the canal bank. We had one man killed and one man
wounded.

The next day on the whole was quiet. There was some shelling at WINDY
CORNER with 4.2’s One Other Rank was killed.

The 25th was quiet up to 9 p.m., when a heavy barrage was placed on our
support lines. The whole Battalion was on working parties by night. Our
support lines were again bombarded at 2 20 p.m. on the 26th.

Platoons were detached and sent to the Lancashire Fusiliers and the
King’s Own in case of need, and A Company remained in the VILLAGE LINE
all night.

Eight Other Ranks were wounded on this and the following day.

The following are extracts from various telegrams, letters, and Press
cuttings referring to the Battle of GIVENCHY:--

                   (SPECIAL SUPPLEMENTARY DESPATCH.)

                    THE 55th DIVISION AT GIVENCHY.

                             Headquarters, France, Monday, 1 15 p.m.

On the morning of the German attack on April 9th, 1918, the 55th (West
Lancashire) Division (Territorial) was holding a front of about 6,000
yards, extending from the LA BASSEE CANAL to just south of RICHEBOURG
L’AVOUE, where its line joined that held by the Portuguese. The enemy’s
attack on the southern portion of this front was delivered by all three
Regiments of the 4th Ersatz Division, which was well up to strength.
A captured Divisional Order issued by the General Staff of this
German Division, and dated April 6th, 1918, shows that its objectives
were “the ground and the British position in the triangle formed by
GIVENCHY--FESTUBERT--GORRE.” The following passages from this captured
order are of special interest:--

   In our attack our three Regiments will be opposed by at most
   six Companies in front and at most two Reserve Battalions in
   FESTUBERT and GIVENCHY. One Battalion in Divisional Reserve is
   south of the LA BASSEE CANAL in LE PREOL. It will be prevented
   by our powerful artillery fire from taking part in the fight
   for FESTUBERT and GIVENCHY. The troops are elements of the
   English 55th Division, which, after being engaged on the
   SOMME, has suffered heavy losses in FLANDERS and at CAMBRAI,
   and was described by prisoners in March, 1918, as a Division
   fit to hold a quiet sector, that is below the average quality.

The order containing the passages quoted above was distributed among
all Officers and Under-Officers of the 4th Ersatz Division down to
Platoon Commanders, presumably with a view to encouraging the troops
prior to their attack, and in the belief that the opposition met with
would not be very serious. If this was his expectation the enemy was
most signally disappointed.

Throughout the early part of the morning of April 9th, the 55th
Division beat off all attacks on its forward zone, and maintained its
line intact. Later, when the German infantry had broken through the
Portuguese positions on its left, the Division formed a defensive flank
facing north-east on the line GIVENCHY--FESTUBERT to the neighbourhood
of LE TOURET. This line it maintained practically unchanged until
relief, through six days of almost continual fighting, in the course of
which it beat off repeated German attacks with the heaviest losses to
the enemy, and took nearly 1,000 prisoners.

At one time, on the first day of his attack, the enemy’s troops
forced their way into GIVENCHY and FESTUBERT. Both villages were
shortly afterwards regained by the 55th Division as the result of a
highly-successful counter-attack, in which several hundred Germans
were captured. All further attempts on the part of the enemy to carry
these positions broke down before the resolute defence of the 55th
Division. Though he succeeded on April 11th in entering a post north
of FESTUBERT, he was thrown out again by a counter-attack, and on the
night of April 12th the 55th Division improved its position in this
neighbourhood, capturing a German post and taking several prisoners.

Next day, during the afternoon, the enemy heavily bombarded the whole
front held by the Division between GORRE and the LAWE CANAL, and
subsequently attacked in strength. He was once more repulsed with heavy
loss by the most gallant and successful defence of a Division which he
had been pleased to describe as consisting of second-class troops.


                          TELEGRAMS RECEIVED.

  From Field-Marshal Sir Douglas Haig, K.T., G.C.B., G.C.V.O.,
     K.C.I.E., April 10th, 1918:--

  “Please convey to General Jeudwine and to all Officers and men of the
  55th Division my congratulations on their splendid fighting yesterday,
  especially at FESTUBERT and GIVENCHY.”

  From General Sir H. Plumer, G.C.B., G.C.M.G., G.C.V.O.,
        Commanding 2nd Army, April 9th, 1918:--

  “Many congratulations on your success at GIVENCHY from the 2nd Army.”

  From Lieutenant-General Sir H. S. Horne, K.C.B., K.C.M.G.,
     Commanding 1st Army, April 9th, 1918:--

  “Sincere congratulations to you and all ranks of the 55th Division on
     your splendid defence to-day.”

  From Lieutenant-General Sir R. Haking, K.C.B., K.C.M.G.,
     Commanding XI. Corps, April 10th, 1918:--

  “I wish to thank you, your Brigade, Battalion, and Company Commanders,
  for the splendid manner in which you have repelled the enemy’s attack
  along your whole front and formed a very wide flank on your left when
  the Division there was driven back.

  “The fine offensive spirit displayed by Officers and men on this
  occasion reflects the highest credit upon the whole Division. Although
  heavily attacked along your whole front and your left flank turned, you
  have been successful in maintaining your original line and even gaining
  some ground and capturing over 700 prisoners.

  “The co-operation of the Artillery, Engineers, and Pioneer Battalion
  was excellent throughout, and it will be a great pleasure to me to
  report the matter to the Army Commander.”

  From the Earl of Derby, K.G., Secretary of State for War,
     April 10th, 1918:--

  “Well done, 55th! You have done splendidly, as you always do.”

  From the XI. Corps, April 11th, 1918:--

  “The Corps Commander wishes his congratulations conveyed to all ranks
  of the 55th Division on again beating off German attacks.”

  From G.O.C. 1st Division, April 11th, 1918:--

  “On behalf of the 1st Division I wish to convey to you and all ranks of
  the 55th Division our admiration of your stout fight at GIVENCHY and
  FESTUBERT.”

  From the 42nd Division, April 20th, 1918:--

  “All ranks of the 42nd East Lancashire Division most heartily
  congratulate the 55th West Lancashire Division on their magnificent
  defence of GIVENCHY. They are glad to be able to think that the work
  and plans commenced by them stood their Lancashire brothers in good
  stead.”

  From the 51st Division, April 10th, 1918:--

  “Heartiest congratulations from all ranks 51st (Highland) Division on
  the fine victory won by you yesterday.”

  From the 57th Division:--

  “All ranks 57th Division congratulate 55th Division on their fine
  fight.”

  From the Mayor of Preston, April 13th, 1918:--

  “I have heard with greatest admiration of the splendid work of the
  Officers and men of your Division. We are very proud of them.”


                       EXTRACTS FROM NEWSPAPERS.

“The Times,” April 11th, 1918:--


                    55th DIVISION’S FINE FIGHTING.

                   (From our Special Correspondent.)

“The breach made by the Portuguese retirement threw an enormous strain
on the British 55th Division on the extreme right, which held the
positions about GIVENCHY. The Lancashire men threw back their left to
make a flank on that side, and then began the defence of GIVENCHY,
which will be remembered as one of the brilliant incidents of this
war. The ground here was of some importance, as being almost the only
exception to the general flatness of the battle area. Three times,
it is said, at least, the German masses succeeded in breaking a way
into GIVENCHY, once during the course of the day, and twice during the
evening and night, only to be thrown out again by the most dashing
counter-attacks. This morning GIVENCHY and all our original line
remained in our hands, and I believe it still remains, and, out of the
prisoners taken, over 700 were captured by the Lancashire men.”

[Note.--Of these, 560 were taken by the 1/4th North Lancashire
Regiment.]

“The Times,” April 12th, 1918:--

“The section of attack was delivered in great strength, some eleven
or twelve Divisions being used on not more than 17,000 yards, and the
weight of the impact drove back the Portuguese front at the centre. It
was the magnificent stand of the 55th Lancashire Division at GIVENCHY
which prevented what might have been a rather serious disaster. Of the
behaviour of our men in this fighting round GIVENCHY nothing could be
said in too high praise. This morning the Germans were still attacking
here, and in vain.”

“Daily Mail,” April 15th, 1918:--

“For the work of such Divisions as the 9th, 51st, and 55th no praise
can be too high, no words of laudation extravagant. With their backs to
the wall they have shown that they are capable of reaching new heights
of heroism, as great as any the glorious past has known.”

“Daily Mail,” April 16th, 1918:--

“They have fought with a gallantry and endurance worthy of their race,
and the heroism of the 55th (Lancashire Territorial) Division is
worthily celebrated by Sir Douglas Haig in a special despatch. Their
country may indeed be proud of these men who are so lavishly giving
their blood on her behalf, and she will follow their efforts with her
love and prayers.”

“Le Petit Parisien,” April 12th, 1918:--

“At the beginning of the attack, after the Portuguese had been forced
back, the plan of the German High Command was checked thanks to
the indomitable resistance which was offered by the British right
flank. There the enemy found established a Lancashire Division--the
55th--which will certainly be mentioned in the communique. It is the
least that can be done for this Division. For ten hours three German
Divisions tried in vain to dislodge it.”

“Le Matin,” April 13th, 1918:--

“It was there that the 55th Division--as I have already told you--held
on and triumphed. I wanted to see with my own eyes some of these
bravest of the brave. But before seeing them I had already seen their
prisoners....

   “‘One should be almost proud to have been beaten by such men,’
   said one prisoner who belonged to the German nobility.

“An Officer of the highest rank said to them (the 55th):

   “‘You have accomplished one of the finest
   feats-of-arms--perhaps the finest of the whole war.’

“It is true. They had fought to the limit of the impossible.”

On the 28th we moved into the right sector and relieved the 1/4th
King’s Own--A Company to MAIRIE REDOUBT, B Company to DEATH OR
GLORY SAP, C and D to GUNNERS’ SIDING. The sap had been heavily
trench-mortared before we took over, and parts of it were blown in. One
Other Rank was killed and four wounded. The award of the French Croix
de Guerre to Sergeant J. Cookson was announced.

On the 29th, DEATH OR GLORY SAP was heavily “minnied.” Two Other Ranks
were killed and three wounded. On the 30th, there was some heavy
shelling, though only one man was wounded, but we lost one man killed
and one wounded from minenwerfer the following day. On the 2nd we were
relieved by the 1/5th King’s Liverpool Regiment, 12 men being wounded
in the course of the day, and went back to rest.

This rest was thoroughly enjoyed by the whole Battalion, being the
first real rest since the battle of GIVENCHY. The billets were good,
and the canteen well stocked.

On the 8th, we moved back to the line, Major Duggan, M.C., being in
command, and relieved the 1/7th King’s Liverpool Regiment in the right
sector.

Wiring and working under difficult conditions continued until the 12th,
three men being killed and eight wounded, two missing, and seven sick
during the tour. We were relieved on the night of the 12th by the 2/5th
Lancashire Fusiliers, and moved back to support.

On the 14th, A Company carried out an operation against the enemy’s
front line post in WILLOW DRAIN, penetrating his line at one point
and establishing a block which they held till about 10 30 p.m., being
then obliged to withdraw by strong counter-attack. The front and
support lines were heavily bombarded from 6 15 p.m. till about 11 p.m.,
harassing fire being kept up until 2 a.m.

The raiding party sustained heavy casualties. Going across No Man’s
Land--a mass of shell holes--Second Lieutenant Ibbotson was wounded and
then killed by a shell; Second Lieutenant Milne was killed by a bomb
while passing through the enemy wire; and Second Lieutenant Cooper was
wounded by a bullet in the throat, causing the loss of his voice, but
gallantly went on writing his orders in his pocket book and carrying
on until killed by a second bullet[J]. There is no record of the other
casualties, but they numbered about 50.

This raid was supported by a creeping barrage, the ground in the
neighbourhood being blanketed throughout by artillery and Stokes’
mortars.

On the 17th we relieved the 1/4th King’s Own in the left GIVENCHY
sector, A Company at PLANTAIN SOUTH, B Company left front Company, C
Company right front Company, D Company holding the KEEPS. Four Other
Ranks were killed and Second Lieutenant Chapman and 19 Other Ranks
wounded during the tour, which came to an end on the 20th, when the
1/6th King’s Liverpool Regiment relieved us at 2 10 a.m.

The Battalion then moved back to rest billets.

The period now under review was known as the “bustle” period, as that
was the code word on receipt of which all kinds of moves were to take
place which cannot here be detailed.

In our rest billets at VAUDRICOURT we went through the usual training
and bathing routine until the 26th, when we relieved the 1/7th King’s
Liverpool Regiment in the GIVENCHY left sector. During the rest Second
Lieutenant Hampson was killed and four men wounded.

At this time a stringent order was issued that anyone damaging crops
was to be court-martialled (rather a contrast to the same period in the
previous year, when the fields which formed our training grounds being
covered with young corn, we had been ordered to disregard the crops
entirely. Obeying this order went literally against the grain!).

On the 25th May the following honours were announced:--

Bar to Military Medal:--Corporal Pendlebury, M.M., and Lance-Corporal
P. Wyre, M.M.

Military Medal:--Sergeants R. Parkinson and A. Lowe, Corporal J.
Gradwell, Privates A. Hommans, G. Rotherham, T. Marsh, W. Goodram, J.
Meadows, R. Williams, F. Lloyd, J. Read, L. Cunliffe, and T. Farnworth.

We had five men wounded on the 27th.

On the 28th, described in the War Diary as “a quiet day,” a small party
of the enemy entered one of our posts in PICCADILLY at 12 30 a.m. It
was immediately bombed out without casualties to us. The attempt was
repeated the following day, but frustrated by our Lewis gunners and
rifle grenadiers. Thirteen men were wounded in the next three days.

On the 1st June, the enemy bombarded us heavily with mustard gas shells
and shrapnel for two hours, killing Second Lieutenant Greaves and
wounding Captain Lonsdale and 10 Other Ranks.

On the 2nd, also described as “a quiet day,” six Other Ranks were
killed and Second Lieutenant Dawson and 23 Other Ranks were wounded,
and on the following day two killed and 15 wounded. The Battalion was
relieved in the evening by the 1/4th King’s Own, when we went back to
support. Working parties occupied us for the next few days, three men
being killed, one missing, and five wounded during the period.

On the 8th, on relief by the 1/6th King’s Liverpool Regiment, we moved
back to rest billets at VAUDRICOURT.

The following appeared in the King’s Birthday Honour List:--

Mentioned in Despatches:--Lieutenant-Colonel J. A. Crump, Privates R.
Worden and J. Bates.

Distinguished Service Order:--Lieutenant-Colonel J. A. Crump.

Bars to Military Cross:--Major Duggan, M.C., Captain Lonsdale, M.C.,
Second Lieutenant H. Fazackerley, M.C.

Military Cross:--Captain D. Carmichael, Lieutenant A. Bardsley, Second
Lieutenants H. Bailey and C. Milne.

Distinguished Conduct Medal:--Company Sergeant-Major Ireland, Sergeants
J. Miller, M.M., and A. Atkinson, Privates F. Reddish, J. Livesey, and
T. Parkes, M.M.

Companies were thoroughly reorganised. Training was carried out and
sports were held.

On the 14th June, Major T. G. Williams, M.C., 1/7th King’s Liverpool
Regiment, took over command of the Battalion. On the same day the
Battalion relieved the 1/7th King’s Liverpool Regiment in the right
GIVENCHY sector. The usual routine was carried out during the tour. The
enemy bombarded the sector on the 19th and again on the 20th at 3 a.m.,
when he put down a severe barrage of 4.2’s and some mustard gas. We
were relieved on the night of the 23rd by the 1/4th King’s Own. During
the tour our casualties were:--Second Lieutenant Pasley and eight Other
Ranks killed, and 17 Other Ranks wounded, Lieutenants Hyndson and
Pierce, Second Lieutenant Boddington, and 16 Other Ranks going sick to
hospital.

Our bombing post in HALF-MOON TRENCH was not more than 20 yards
distant from a bombing post in the enemy’s sector, and after a careful
reconnaissance had been made under the supervision of the Officer
Commanding B Company (Captain R. H. Smith, M.C.), Second Lieutenant
Weatherhill volunteered to take out a patrol the following night and
raid the enemy’s trenches. The night was a particularly dark one, but,
unfortunately, the enemy discovered the patrol getting out of the
trenches, and the attacking party was subjected to a heavy fire from
machine guns and bombs. The patrol remained out for about an hour, but
finally they returned to the trenches, and it was found that Second
Lieutenant Weatherhill was missing and two Other Ranks wounded. Another
patrol was immediately sent out by the Officer Commanding B Company to
find out what had happened to Second Lieutenant Weatherhill, but this
and other subsequent patrols met with no success.

On the 27th, on relief, we went back into support, and at 5 a.m. on the
following day to rest billets at VAUDRICOURT. Here the G.O.C. presented
medals and ribbons to Officers and men of the Battalion on the 30th.

On the 1st July, at the Brigade Horse Show, the Battalion did very
well, carrying off the Championship Cup and six first prizes, which
in itself was sufficient reward to the Officer Commanding Transport
(Lieutenant A. Bardsley, M.C.) and all Other Ranks. It might here be
mentioned that, under the supervision of Lieutenant A. Bardsley, the
Battalion Transport did very well in the Division Show and later on
obtained first prize at the Corps Transport Show.

On the 3rd we moved up in position to the line and relieved the 1/7th
King’s Liverpool Regiment in support in the GIVENCHY sector, one man
being killed and four wounded, and two more wounded the following day.

On the evening of the 7th we relieved the 2/5th Lancashire Fusiliers on
the left sector--a very difficult relief, Companies having to move up
their sectors through a heavy bombardment of 4.2’s, 5.9’s, whizzbangs,
and minenwerfers. This was the enemy’s retaliation for our bombardment
in connection with a raid carried out on our flank by the 1st
Cameronians. One Other Rank was killed and six wounded. The next few
days were spent in the usual routine and working and wiring parties,
and were fairly quiet, our casualties for the tour being:--Seven Other
Ranks killed and eight wounded.

On the 16th we were relieved by the 1/6th King’s Liverpool Regiment,
and moved back to LE PREOL, where we stood-to for the night, moving
back to VAUDRICOURT the following morning.

On the 20th a dance for Officers and men took place in the Recreation
Hut.

On the 22nd we relieved the 1/5th King’s Liverpool Regiment in the
right GIVENCHY sector.

No prisoners having been captured by the Corps for about a fortnight,
the Divisional Commander was very anxious that prisoners should be
obtained for the purpose of identification, and with this end in view,
on the 27th, two reconnaissances by Second Lieutenant Archibald on
the old British Line opposite ORCHARD ROAD during the morning, and by
Second Lieutenant Dawson opposite FINCHLEY ROAD SAP in the afternoon,
found both enemy posts unoccupied. It was therefore decided that
these two Officers should take part in a silent daylight raid, and on
the following day both Officers took over patrols. Second Lieutenant
Dawson’s patrol met with no success, but Second Lieutenant Archibald’s
patrol succeeded in capturing three of the enemy and one machine gun
and returned to our trenches with no casualties and without a single
shot having been fired by either side.

Congratulatory telegrams were received by the Officer Commanding and
Second Lieutenant Archibald was awarded for his gallantry the Military
Cross and the Non-Commissioned Officer who accompanied him was awarded
the Military Medal.

On the 29th, at his own request, Second Lieutenant Dawson again tried
to effect an entry into the enemy’s line, and was successful in finding
three men and a strong working party, which the patrol promptly bombed.
Our casualties were nil, and from documents subsequently captured from
the enemy it would appear that these raids had a depressing effect on
the enemy’s morale.

On the 30th, Second Lieutenant Archibald and two Other Ranks again
entered the post and reconnoitred the trench, finding quantities of
bombs. Later in the day they returned to the enemy’s trench, collected
all explosives in a dugout, and blew it up. We were relieved that night
by the 1/4th King’s Own, and went back into support. The casualties
during the tour were eight Other Ranks wounded.

On the 1st August we found ourselves in the GIVENCHY VILLAGE Lines.

On the 3rd we tried to select a shooting team for the Army competition,
but had to give it up owing to hostile shelling. That night we moved
back to rest billets at VAUDRICOURT. Boxing, cricket, dances, and
Divisional Horse Shows were the chief events of the next few days.

The Battalion relieved the 1/6th King’s Liverpool Regiment in the
left GIVENCHY sector on the 9th. All ranks of the Battalion, with
the exception of those actually on sentry posts, were employed
during the day on wire carrying and making “concertinas” with a view
to strengthening the defences, and during this tour the Battalion
accomplished a great improvement in the wire defences.

Things were quiet, except for wire-cutting by our artillery, up till
the 15th, when we had two hours’ shelling by yellow cross gas shells,
projected from trench mortars. We moved back to support in the evening,
being relieved by the 2/5th Lancashire Fusiliers. During the tour,
Second Lieutenants Archibald, Cowan, and Shell were wounded, and four
Other Ranks were wounded and 14 Other Ranks were gassed. The next few
days in support were occupied by bathing, working and carrying parties,
the casualties being:--Three Other Ranks killed, 18 wounded, and Second
Lieutenants Dixon, Dawson, and 61 Other Ranks gassed.

On the 23rd, we moved in to hold the right and left sub-sectors during
the capture of the craters by the 1/4th King’s Own and the 2/5th
Lancashire Fusiliers, which operation was successfully accomplished.

There was a good deal of shelling during these days, Second Lieutenant
Fazackerley, M.C., and one Other Rank being killed, one Other Rank
gassed, and Second Lieutenant Pride and 10 Other Ranks wounded. The
loss of Second Lieutenant Fazackerley, M.C., was keenly felt by all
ranks of the Battalion.

On the 27th we went back to rest billets at VAUDRICOURT.

On the 3rd September we relieved the 1/6th King’s Liverpool Regiment in
the GIVENCHY left sub-sector. The craters were heavily shelled between
4 and 6 p.m. with 5.9’s and blue and yellow cross gas. Reconnoitring
patrols pushed out at daylight and established posts on the west edge
of CHAPPELLE ST. ROCHE. Second Lieutenants Tennant, Kershaw, and Scott,
and 21 Other Ranks were gassed, 1 killed, and 1 wounded.

The change of mental attitude in this chapter and in the next is very
noticeable. No longer do we take part in costly attacks on a wide front
or beat off similar attacks by the enemy, nor do we sit still and
merely harass him. We feel ourselves winning at last--the game becomes
more exciting as we begin to press, and then to follow, a beaten enemy.




                              CHAPTER X.

                             THE ADVANCE.


On the 1st September, 1918, orders were received that Infantry Brigades
in the line must be prepared to follow up the enemy rapidly should
he commence to withdraw on the Divisional front, fighting patrols to
make good what ground they could; this was consequent upon reports of
fires and explosions behind the enemy’s line and information from enemy
prisoners.

On the 4th, patrols having reported the evacuation of the enemy’s front
line trenches, Battalion Headquarters moved up from WINDY CORNER to
GIVENCHY KEEP TUNNEL. D Company secured a prisoner. One of our night
patrols encountered enemy at ROCHE ALLEY, and a sharp fight ensued; we
left one man severely wounded, who was brought in by a daylight patrol.
Lieutenant King and 38 Other Ranks were gassed, one Other Rank killed,
and Second Lieutenant Davies and two Other Ranks wounded.

The following day, daylight patrols continued to push up ROCHE ALLEY
and CUPOLA ALLEY, and established outposts, our own line being in
advance of the right Battalion. The enthusiasm of all ranks to push
forward was much marked, and the respective Companies vied with each
other in their endeavour to establish posts farthest east of any in
the Battalion or in the Division. Four Other Ranks were wounded and 12
Other Ranks gassed.

On the 6th there was a little scattered shelling; we were relieved
in daylight by the 1/4th King’s Own, and went into support. The next
two days were occupied with carrying parties, which involved hard and
continuous work owing to the state of the trenches and the increasing
distance between the front line posts and the reserves. We had one
Other Rank killed, seven wounded, and three gassed.

On the 9th we relieved the King’s Own again, and patrols located the
enemy at APSE HOUSE. The following night a patrol attacked him, but
without success.

The 11th was very wet, and on the 12th we were relieved by the 2/5th
Lancashire Fusiliers and moved back to support. The casualties during
the tour were: 5 Other Ranks killed, Second Lieutenants Jones, Daniels,
Marsden and Thomas and 18 Other Ranks wounded, 1 Other Rank gassed.

The weather began to improve. The enemy carried out as usual the daily
strafe on the craters on the 13th. Two Other Ranks were killed, one
wounded, and two gassed.

On the 14th, four Platoons from A and C Companies were detailed for
carrying parties to the 2/5th Lancashire Fusiliers, who were attacking
CANTELEUX TRENCH at 1 30 p.m. The operation was classed as unsuccessful
owing to strong counter-attack and heavy shelling, but they secured 10
prisoners. Second Lieutenant L. B. Smith was killed whilst assisting
the attack of the Fusiliers, and six Other Ranks were wounded. The
1/7th King’s Liverpool Regiment relieved us, and we were taken back by
’buses to VAUDRICOURT, where we rested, trained, and carried out the
usual recreational programme.

On the 20th, Lieutenant-Colonel T. G. Williams, M.C., went on leave,
and the Battalion was then under the command of Major A. E. Entwistle.

On the 21st, the Divisional boundaries having been altered, we relieved
the 18th Gloucesters on the CANAL, A Company taking over the outpost
line north of the CANAL, B Company the outpost line south of the CANAL.
The relief passed off without incident.

On the 22nd, B Company pushed their forward posts out about 400 yards.
Much enemy harassing fire on this and the following days. The weather
broke on the 23rd. On the 25th, Companies changed over.

On the 28th, we were relieved by the 1/4th King’s Own, and went into
support at BARGE HOUSE. The casualties during the tour were: 5 Other
Ranks killed, Second Lieutenant Kirkby and 10 Other Ranks wounded.

On the 30th, B and D Companies attacked the DISTILLERY, capturing 58
prisoners, but were forced back to their original line later in the
day. Second Lieutenant Bryne and three Other Ranks were killed. Second
Lieutenant Cairns and 46 Other Ranks were wounded, and two Other Ranks
missing.

On the 1st October, Major H. J. G. Duggan returned from the Senior
Officers’ Course, Aldershot, and took over command from Major
Entwistle. On the same day, at 6 15 a.m., B and D Companies, each
reinforced by two Platoons of C Company, attacked and captured
the DISTILLERY and machine gun posts on the right and left of it;
23 prisoners and four machine guns were taken; Second Lieutenant
Griffiths, Parkinson, Haworth, and Bowler and six Other Ranks were
wounded and 13 Other Ranks killed. At night we were relieved by six
Platoons of the King’s Own, and moved back into support.

On the 2nd, early morning patrols having reported that the enemy was
retiring along his whole front, we moved forward, Headquarters being in
MARIE KEEP. The movement was continued on the following day, 2 Other
Ranks being killed and 5 Other Ranks wounded and missing.

On the 4th, we went back to positions of assembly in LA BASSEE, going
into reserve billets on the 5th.

On the 5th, Lieutenant-Colonel T. G. Williams returned from leave and
resumed his command.

On the 8th, we marched to billets at BETHUNE, and were comfortably
billeted by 4 p.m. Here Second Lieutenant W. E. Crossley, M.C., M.M.,
Captain R. J. Cross (Chaplain), and Second Lieutenants Blount, Towers,
and Kennett joined for duty.

On the 12th, we went up in lurries and relieved the 1/5th King’s Own
as outpost Battalion on the left Brigade front, Battalion Headquarters
being at LATTRE.

On the 13th, our patrols at dawn found the enemy very alert, and
located several machine gun posts west of the HAUTE DEULE CANAL. Some
harassing fire on our forward posts during the day. Two Other Ranks
were killed, Second Lieutenant Taylor and nine Other Ranks missing, and
Second Lieutenant Crossley and one Other Rank wounded.

On the 14th, the enemy artillery became more active, and our patrols
were heavily engaged by machine guns. The marshes were found almost
impassable, the water being eight feet deep in places. Our sentry
posts located in the marshes were unremitting in their attempts to
push forward, and the spirit of all ranks, despite the conditions, was
excellent. Seven Other Ranks were killed and 11 Other Ranks wounded.
Second Lieutenant R. G. Latham joined for duty.

On the 15th the harassing fire continued. Our patrols were very active,
but did not advance. Captain W. L. Price and five Other Ranks were
wounded. Second Lieutenant H. C. Saville joined for duty.

On the 16th, patrols reported some of the enemy posts unoccupied. At
12 noon D Company and two Platoons of B Company crossed the HAUTE
DEULE CANAL at LES ANSCRUILLES, and proceeded to attack from the flank
the strongly-held bridgehead at BAC DE WAVRIN, A and C Companies
attacking frontally at the same time. The attack was under the personal
supervision of Major H. J. G. Duggan, M.C. The bridgehead was taken at
9 p.m., and patrols pushed on to the SECLIN CANAL. Pontoon bridges were
thrown across the Canals. Lieutenant Bury and Second Lieutenant Taylor
and one Other Rank were wounded.

On the 17th, the 2/5th Lancashire Fusiliers and the 1/4th King’s Own
passed through our outposts at 5 a.m. The Battalion reorganised and
assembled at WAVRIN. At 4 p.m. we moved to NOYELLES, and were billeted
by 11 p.m. Second Lieutenant Taylor died of wounds. Second Lieutenant
Hailwood and two Other Ranks were killed and seven Other Ranks were
wounded.

On the 18th, at 3 a.m., we moved into the main outpost line of
resistance east of D’ENCHEMONT.

On the 19th, at 7 a.m., the Battalion passed through the outpost line
held by the King’s Own on the LAMARQ RIVER, and advanced--A and C
Companies in front and B and D in support. The enemy resistance was
practically nil, and the villages of CYSOING, BOURGHELLES and WANNEHAIN
and ESPLECHIN were captured. At night we took up outpost positions,
with B and D Companies along the line of resistance, on the high ground
east of WANNEHAIN; A Company found the outposts to the east. One Other
Rank was wounded.

On the 20th, the 2/5th Lancashire Fusiliers marched through our outpost
lines and we moved into Brigade reserve. One Other Rank was wounded.

On the 21st, in the afternoon, we moved into billets at FROIDMONT. At
2 a.m. on the 22nd, we relieved the 1/4th King’s Own in the outpost
line--C Company on the right, D on the left, A and B Companies in
support. We attempted to advance, but were unable to do so owing to
heavy machine gun and artillery fire, five Other Ranks being killed,
14 wounded, and one missing. Our daylight patrols found the enemy was
holding a strong line with many machine guns. At the time of relief it
was understood that the enemy had been cleared out of the wood in O 33
b and d, but when the Officer Commanding D Company (Captain Montague
Smith) attempted to enter the wood he was met by strong machine gun
fire.

The Officer Commanding D Company planned two attacks on the wood, but
the enemy were so strong as to make these unsuccessful. Artillery
assistance was asked for, and at 4 30 p.m., under an artillery barrage,
D Company attacked and was completely successful in capturing the wood,
taking 18 prisoners and four machine guns. Outposts were pushed up in
front of the wood, and at dusk the Company was relieved by B Company
(Captain R. H. Smith, M.C.).

At 2 a.m. on the 23rd, we drove off an enemy counter-attack, but at
4 30 a.m. a strong counter-attack delivered from the flank with the
strength of about two Companies forced our posts to withdraw from
the wood. There was a thick fog at the time of the attack, and,
communications having broken down, no assistance was forthcoming from
our artillery. The Officer Commanding B Company, however, immediately
organised Company Headquarters and a Platoon of A Company and delivered
a quick counter-attack, which, whilst it was not successful in
regaining the wood, effectually managed to establish us some little
distance our side of the wood. We were relieved by the 2/5th Lancashire
Fusiliers about midnight. Second Lieutenants Chambers and Blount and
33 Other Ranks were missing, one Other Rank killed, and 25 Other
Ranks wounded. We moved into billets at FROIDMONT, where Battalion
Headquarters had to change their location, being shelled with mustard
gas. Seven Other Ranks were wounded.

On the 25th, we relieved the 1/4th King’s Own in the main line of
resistance, Battalion Headquarters being at FERME DU BARON, C Company
on the right, D Company in the centre, A Company on the left, and B
Company in support. Lieutenant King rejoined us here. The next two days
were occupied in working parties.

On the 28th, we were relieved by the 1/7th King’s Liverpool Regiment,
and moved to billets at WANNEHAIN, where we bathed and rested.
Two Officers and 59 Other Ranks had gone sick during the month. A
Divisional Paper Chase was attended by the mounted Officers on the 1st
November.

On the 9th, the enemy having retired further, we moved on to ESPLECHIN,
and on the 10th to BARRY, marching to VILLIERS ST. AMAND on the 11th.

The Armistice at 11 o’clock on that day put a stop to further
operations. Whilst nobody could be sorry that the War had come to an
end, it was annoying to be stopped when we had at last really got going
and the fox was in sight.

Many of us thought at the time, and still think, that we might have
gone on a little further, and that it was a mistake not to push the
advance and really rout the enemy.

At eight o’clock on Armistice night the Battalion Band attended a dance
given by the Brigadier, General C. B. Stockwell, C.B., C.M.G., D.S.O.,
and the first social function after the Armistice at which the Officers
of the Battalion were represented was a great success.

Captain M. Smith was awarded the Military Cross for his gallantry and
initiative displayed in the successful attack on the wood O 33 b and
d. Captain R. H. Smith was awarded a Bar to his Military Cross for his
personal bravery and initiative in organising a prompt counter-attack
after we had lost the wood O 33 b and d. Major H. J. G. Duggan, M.C.,
was awarded the D.S.O. for personal bravery and leadership displayed at
BAC DE WAVRIN and the attack on the wood O 33 b and d.

  [Illustration: The Colours Marching Past the King of the Belgians,
  Brussels, 3rd January, 1919.]




                              CHAPTER XI.

                         AFTER THE ARMISTICE.


Although fighting was now over, the “War” was not. Working parties and
training still continued at LEUZE, whither we marched on the 14th,
and on the 25th the “Education Period” commenced. We moved to WATTINE
(Chappelle) on the 26th, and on the 2nd December sent an escort,
consisting of Captain S. H. Pruden, M.C., and Lieutenant Bulling,
Company Sergeant-Major Roberts, and two Sergeants, to England to bring
out the Colours, which were handed to them on the 7th in Preston by the
Mayor. The same day the Battalion lined the main road on the occasion
of the King’s visit to LEUZE.

The Colour Party rejoined us on the 10th, and the Colours paraded with
the Battalion for the first time on the 13th. On the 15th we moved to
ATH. On the following days we moved to EUGHEHEIM, LEMBECQ, and UCCLE,
where we prepared for a long stay in good billets. Second Lieutenant A.
Livesey was awarded the Military Cross.

The total casualties for the year 1918 were as follows:--

                Killed   Wounded   Missing  Gassed  D. of W.  W. & M.
    Officers      10       31         6         4       1         25
    Other Ranks  140      514       101       154       0        595
                 ---      ---       ---       ---       -        ---
      Totals     150      545       107       158       1        620
              Officers 77.     Other Ranks 1,504.

The Battalion marched past the King of the Belgians in BRUSSELS.

The total casualties of the Battalion for the whole of the War are set
out in the War Diary as follows:--

                                                 M. believed
               Killed  Wounded  Missing  W. & M.   Killed  Gassed
    Officers      37      95        11        2         2       4
    Other Ranks  376    1846       596       10         0     165
                 ---    ----       ---       --         -     ---
      Totals     413    1941       607       12         2     169

                Died of           Sick
                Wounds  Dwnd.   to F.A.
    Officers      4      0         65
    Other Ranks   1      1       1496
                  -      -       ----
      Totals      5      0       1561
                       Officers  220.     Other Ranks 4,301.

Most of those entered as “Missing” were afterwards reported “Killed in
Action;” many were reported “Prisoners of War,” and it is a matter of
history now these were kept alive by the weekly parcels which reached
them from the Prisoners of War Committee in Preston, to which our
grateful thanks are due.

The process of demobilisation and disintegration of the Battalion now
set in, and our numbers steadily dwindled until nothing but the Cadre
was left.

The Cadre returned to Preston on the 12th June, 1919. Only short notice
was received, but there was a good turnout of Officers and men who
had served with the Battalion, and an entertainment was given by the
Corporation.

With this function the War History of the unit comes to an end.
Practically all of us are now back in civil life, a few not much the
worse for wear, others maimed or with impaired faculties, but 870
Officers and Other Ranks rest in France and Belgium, and to their
memory it is hoped to erect a memorial over there.

  [Illustration: The telegraph post at which the Padre is standing marks
  the site of the Battalion Memorial, with the broken trees surrounding
  Vaucellette Farm about 200 yards behind.]

As the 55th Division Memorial is to be put on GIVENCHY HILL, the scene
of the Battalion’s best-known exploit, another site has had to be
fixed upon. This has been found on the crest of the ridge on which
VAUCELLETTE FARM stood, where the Battalion on 30th November, standing
alone, stemmed the advancing tide of Huns. To the Maire of VILLERS
GUISLAIN and to M.M. Henri and Leon Nolin, the owners of the ground, we
owe the gift of a small square plot by the roadside there, on which to
erect a memorial to our comrades.

    “These gave up the years to be
    Of joy and work, and that unhoped serene
    That men call age; and those who would have been
    Their sons, they gave, their immortality.”

Although many graves have been marked and identified, there are
countless others which never can be; hence the necessity of a single
monument to include all.

Those graves which can be identified have been marked with the
Divisional Cocarde, a representation (about six inches in diameter) in
colour, on enamelled iron, of the 55th Division badge.

  [Illustration]




                              APPENDIXES


A.--List of Honours and Distinctions earned by the Battalion.

B.--Casualties.




                              APPENDIX A.

                1/4th LOYAL NORTH LANCASHIRE REGIMENT.

      A LIST OF HONOURS AND DISTINCTIONS EARNED BY THE BATTALION.


                     DISTINGUISHED SERVICE ORDER.

    Lieutenant-Colonel R. Hindle, D.S.O., June, 1917. Bar to D.S.O.,
        September, 1917.
    Lieutenant-Colonel J. A. Crump, D.S.O., June, 1918.
    Major H. J. G. Duggan, D.S.O., January, 1919.
    Lieutenant-Colonel T. G. Williams, D.S.O., June, 1919.
    Major H. Parker, D.S.O., June, 1919 (Brigade Major, 42nd Division).


                            MILITARY CROSS.

    2nd Lieut. P. Parker                1915
    Capt. J. O. Widdows                 1915
    2nd Lieut. H. Lindsay               1915
    2nd Lieut. H. Lonsdale              1917
    2nd Lieut. S. A. H. Pruden          1917
    Capt. A. T. Houghton                1917
    Capt. D. Carmichael                 1918
    2nd Lieut. J. Adamson               1917
    2nd Lieut. H. Vincent               1917
    2nd Lieut. L. Brooke                1917
    2nd Lieut. R. H. Tautz              1917
    Capt. F. K. Matthew                 1917
    Lieut. A. Bardsley                  1918
    2nd Lieut. H. Fazackerley           1917
    2nd Lieut. C. Milne                 1918
    2nd Lieut. S. B. Westwood           1918
    2nd Lieut. H. Bailey                1918
    2nd Lieut. C. L. Hore               1916
    2nd Lieut. E. Fairclough            1916
    2nd Lieut. D. Archibald             1918
    Capt. J. A. Burnside                1918
    2nd Lieut. H. Brown                 1918
    2nd Lieut. J. M. Caie               1918
    2nd Lieut. J. Cairns                1918
    2nd Lieut. J. Levesley              1918
    2nd Lieut. J. Dawson                1918
    2nd Lieut. R. S. Hulme              1918
    Capt. H. H. Smith                   1918
    Capt. H. S. P. Walmsley (R.F.C.)    1917


                        BAR TO MILITARY CROSS.

    Capt. D. Carmichael              1918
    Capt. S. A. H. Pruden            1917
    2nd Lieut. H. Fazackerley        1918
    Capt. H. Lonsdale                1918
    Major H. J. G. Duggan            1918


                  MENTIONED IN DESPATCHES--OFFICERS.

    Lieut.-Col. R. Hindle (twice)
    Major J. A. Crump (3 times)
    Major H. Parker
    Capt. R. N. L. Buckmaster
    Lieut. F. W. S. Baker
    2nd Lieut. F. K. Matthew
    Capt. L. Duckworth
    Lieut. W. March
    Capt. E. M. Rennard
    Lieut. H. Whitehurst
    Lieut. H. Lindsay

                 MENTIONED IN DESPATCHES--OTHER RANKS.

      1818  Pte. Clarkson, W. A.      January, 1917
      2411  Pte. Foley, T.            January, 1917
    200158  Pte. Cookson, J.          January, 1917
      1689  Lance-Cpl. Parkinson, T.  January, 1917
    200182  R.Q.M.S. Corns, R.        June, 1917
    200128  C.S.M. Dudley, J.         June, 1917
    202826  Pte. Tyldesley, W.        June, 1917
    200379  Pte. Maher, J.            November 7th, 1917
    200048  Pte. Worden, R.           April 7th, 1918
    201078  Cpl. Collier, J.          November 7th, 1917
    200088  Pte. Yates, J.            November 7th, 1918
    200387  Sgt. Dunn, R.             June, 1919
            Lance-Cpl. Baker, J.      1917


                     DISTINGUISHED CONDUCT MEDAL.

    288716  Pte. Cowburn, W.          January 14th, 1916
    200012  Sgt. Lester, E.           January 14th, 1916
    200204  Pte. Moore, W.            January 14th, 1916
      1330  Sgt. Pye, J. R.           January 14th, 1916
    200002  C.S.M. Lindsay, C.        January 14th, 1916
      3975  R.S.M. Farnworth, J. E.   January 14th, 1916
       804  C.S.M. Edwards, T. J.     January 14th, 1916
    200388  Sgt. Fletcher, J.         January 14th, 1916
    200450  Pte. Ward, T.             July 30th, 1916
    200392  Sgt. Hogg, J.             July 30th, 1916
    201697  Sgt. Farnworth, H.        January 19th, 1917
     24980  Sgt. Ashton, E.           September 17th, 1917
    200081  C.S.M. Roberts, H.        October 3rd, 1917
    200077  Sgt. Prescott, S.         October, 1917
    202703  Sgt. Atkinson, A.         September 3rd, 1918
     28064  Pte. Reddish, F.          September 3rd, 1918
    201336  Pte. Livesey, J.          September 3rd, 1918
    200293  Sgt. Miller, J.           September 3rd, 1918
    200575  C.S.M. Ireland, J.        October 3rd, 1918
    241584  Pte. Harris, W.           November 2nd, 1918
    201260  Lance-Cpl. Butcher, T.    July 31st, 1917
            Pte. Parkes, T.           1918


             MILITARY MEDAL AND MERITORIOUS SERVICE MEDAL.

         8  Sgt. Entwistle, T.        M.M.    August 23rd, 1916
      1984  Sgt. Lancaster, J.        M.M.    August 23rd, 1916
       301  Cpl. Bettley, B.          M.M.    September, 1916
      2859  Cpl. Osbaddeston, J.      M.M.    November 16th, 1916
     34325  Sgt. Goodridge, D.        M.M.    January, 1917
    200293  Pte. Miller, J.           M.M.    November, 1916
    200875  Pte. Seed, T.             M.M.    November, 1916
    200090  Sgt. Yates, R. T.         M.M.    July, 1917
     34979  Sgt. Cosgrove, J.         M.M.    September, 1917
    202761  Pte. Spencer, J.          M.M.    September, 1917
    200489  Cpl. Homer, A.            M.S.M.  September, 1917
     31987  Cpl. Walmsley, J.         M.M.    September, 1917
    201390  Lance-Sgt. Robinson, J.   M.M.    October, 1917
    200682  Pte. Coupe, F.            M.M.    October, 1917
    200352  Pte. Thistleton, T.       M.M.    October, 1917
    201197  Cpl. Thompson, J.         M.M.    October, 1917
    200756  Lance-Cpl. Gorton, F.     M.M.    October, 1917
    200895  Sgt. Knowles, R.          M.M.    October, 1917
    291178  Pte. Goodwin, C. J. H.    M.M.    October, 1917
     16940  Pte. Cunningham, J.       M.M.    October, 1917
     34304  Pte. Jones, T. E.         M.M.    October, 1917
    238001  Pte. Roocroft, W.         M.M.    October, 1917
      6693  Sgt. Murphy, J.           M.M.    October, 1917
    202099  Pte. Wyre, P.             M.M.    October, 1917
    201683  Cpl. Dring, A.            M.M.    August 11th, 1918
    200541  Sgt. Turner, F.           M.S.M.  August 29th, 1918
    240966  Lance-Cpl. Davenport, T.  M.M.    September 9th, 1918
    202467  Lance-Sgt. Holt, A.       M.M.    October 26th, 1918
     30479  Lance-Cpl. Bamford, W.    M.M.    October 26th, 1918
     40834  Pte. Lee, S. N.           M.M.    October 26th, 1918
     30471  Lance-Cpl. Davies, G. J.  M.M.    October 26th, 1918
    202640  Pte. Cunliffe, L.         M.M.    October 26th, 1918
     29405  Pte. Goldstraw, J.        M.M.    October 26th, 1918
     26006  Cpl. Summers, E. M.       M.M.    November 29th, 1918
    200056  R.Q.M.S. Aspden, J.       M.S.M.  December, 1918
    200568  Sgt. Ryan, T.             M.S.M.  1918
     20540  Sgt. Birch, R.            M.S.M.  1918
    290177  C.S.M. Porter, R.         M.S.M.  1918
    200864  Cpl. Bell, W.             M.M.
    240412  Pte. Farnworth, T.        M.M.    October, 1918
      2046  Sgt. Leach, J.            M.M.    July, 1916
       184  Pte. Gent, C.             M.M.    July, 1916
    200081  C.Q.M.S. Roberts, H.      M.M.    July, 1916
    200222  C.Q.M.S. Heywood, J. W.   M.M.    July, 1916
      2553  Pte. Latham, E.           M.M.    July, 1916
    200174  Lance-Cpl. Bamber, J.     M.M.    July, 1916
       274  Sgt. Bates, A.            M.M.    July, 1916
       165  Sgt. Board, J. H.         M.M.    July, 1916
      4948  Pte. Gent, F.             M.M.    July, 1916
    200240  Pte. Ainscough, T.        M.M.    January, 1917
     29679  Pte. Parkinson, T.        M.M.    September, 1917
    200057  Sgt. Heaps, J.            M.M.    September, 1917
    200357  Pte. Parkinson, J. H.     M.M.    September, 1917
    200143  Cpl. Finnerty, T.         M.M.    September, 1917
    200782  Pte. Park, T.             M.M.    September, 1917
    201356  Lance-Cpl. Norris, P.     M.M.    September, 1917
     12154  Lance-Sgt. Cayton, T.     M.M.    September, 1917
    201542  Sgt. Bell, H.             M.M.    October, 1917
    202967  Pte. Yates, W.            M.M.    October, 1917
    200541  Sgt. Turner, F.           M.M.    January, 1918
    200218  Sgt. Parkinson, T. R.     M.M.  September 3rd, 1918
    200643  Sgt. Cookson, J. E.       M.M.  September, 1917
     36204  Pte. Read, J.             M.M.  October 7th, 1918
    202072  Pte. Meadows, J.          M.M.  October 7th, 1918
    202814  Pte. Rotherham, G.        M.M.  October 7th, 1918
    200661  Cpl. Gradwell, J.         M.M.  October 7th, 1918
     32211  Pte. Williams, R.         M.M.  October 7th, 1918
    240239  Sgt. Lowe, J.             M.M.  October 7th, 1918
    200809  Cpl. Pitcher, F.          M.M.  August, 1917
    200237  Lance-Sgt. Sharples, W.   M.M.  October 7th, 1918
    243878  Sgt. Threadgold, W.       M.M.  October 7th, 1918
     36729  Pte. Goodram, W.          M.M.  October 7th, 1918
    202702  Sgt. Kelly, H.            M.M.  October, 1918
    202881  Sgt. Aspden, J.           M.M.  October, 1918
     29342  Sgt. Payne, W.            M.M.  October, 1918
     34075  Lance-Cpl. Norris, H.     M.M.  October, 1918
    290665  Pte. Pendlebury, T.       M.M.  October, 1917
     12910  Pte. Rathbone             M.M.  August, 1917
    200146  Pte. Bates, J.            M.M.  August, 1917
    200414  Pte. Clarkson, W. H.      M.M.  August, 1917
            Pte. Hornmans, A.         M.M.  1918
            Pte. Marsh, T.            M.M.  1918
            Pte. Lloyd, F.            M.M.  1918
            Sgt. Hartley              M.M.  1917
            Sgt. Hogg                 M.M.  1917


                        BAR TO MILITARY MEDAL.

     12154  Sgt. Cayton, T.            January, 1918
    290665  Cpl. Pendlebury, T.        June, 1918
    202099  Cpl. Wyre, P.              October 7th, 1918
    201683  Cpl. Dring, A.             October 26th, 1918
    202640  Pte. Cunliffe, L.          October 26th, 1918
    200293  Sgt. Miller, J.            October 26th, 1918
    202647  Sgt. Holt, A.              October, 1918


                       CROIX DE GUERRE (FRENCH).

       230  Sgt. Lester, E.            June, 1915
    200158  Sgt. Cookson, J.           August 17th, 1918
    201683  Cpl. Wilkinson, J. S.      January, 1919


                     MEDAILLE MILITAIRE (FRENCH).

       301  Cpl. Bettley, B.           September, 1916
    202752  Cpl. Wilkinson, J.         August 29th, 1918


                     MEDAILLE MILITAIRE (BELGIAN).

    200077  Sgt. Prescott, S.          January, 1919




                              APPENDIX B.

                          THE CASUALTY LISTS.


These lists, originally compiled in Battalion Orderly Room as the
casualties were reported, have now been checked with Records. It is too
much to hope that they are absolutely correct, but the compilers have
done all they can to correct mistakes.

The following signs and abbreviations have been used:--

    +K. in A.  --Killed in Action.
    +D. of W.  --Died of wounds received in action--the first date that
                     of the wounds; the second the death.
     R.P. of W.--Prisoner of war (returned)--the date being that of
                    capture.
     W.        --Wounded.
     N.T.      --An entry in the Battalion Roll which the Record Office
                    cannot trace--probably owing to the number being
                    that by which a man was known in another Battalion.


                1/4th LOYAL NORTH LANCASHIRE REGIMENT.

A list of all casualties sustained by the Battalion between April,
1915, and November, 1918


       Rank and Name.               No.  Coy. Nature of          Date.
                                              Casualty.
     Pte. Abraham, T.              28206  A    W.              18/11/17
                                                             and 2/6/18
     Pte. Abram, P.                 3636  D    W.         N.T.   8/8/16
     2nd Lieut. Absolom, W.          --   -    W.               22/6/16
     Pte. Acult                    27904  B    R.P. of W.        9/4/18
     Pte. Adams, E.                 2813  A    W.               15/8/15
     Pte. Adams, F.                30915  B    W.                9/9/18
    +2nd Lieut. Adamson, J.          --   -    W.              30/11/17
                                               K. in A.         27/2/18
     Pte. Addison, A.               1945  A    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Addison, E.               1465  D    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Affleck, G. H.          203598  A    W.               31/4/17
     2nd Lieut. Agostini,           --    -    W.                7/6/17
          H. F. S.
     Pte. Ainscough, G.           290044  C    W.               20/9/17
     Pte. Ainscough, J. R.         25789  B    W.               16/7/17
     Pte. Ainsworth. A.           203142  B    W.         N.T.   9/4/18
    +Pte. Ainsworth, J.             2055  D    K. in A.         15/6/15
     Pte. Ainsworth, T.             4554  B    W.         N.T.   9/9/16
    +Lance-Cpl. Alcock, T.         28201  A    D. of W.        14/5/18;
                                                                24/5/18
     Lance-Cpl. Alcock, T.         30477  B    W.                1/6/18
     Lance-Cpl. Aldridge, T. F.     3444  C    W.         N.T.   8/8/16
    +Pte. Alexander, J.            17912  B    K. in A.          3/7/18
     Pte. Alker, T.                 4328  B    W.                9/9/16
     Pte. Allan, W.                 3356  C    W.               15/6/15
    +Pte. Allen, J.               202880  D    D. of W.        15/7/17;
                                                                15/9/17
     Cpl. Allen, M.                 2501  B    W.               28/6/16
     Pte. Allen, P.                34829  C    R.P. of W.       20/9/17
     Pte. Allen, R.                 5640  B    W.               31/7/17
    +Lance-Cpl. Allen, R.         202611  B    K. in A.         31/7/17
    +Lance-Cpl. Allen, S.         202890  D    K. in A.   N.T.  16/9/17
     Lance-Cpl. Allen, T.         202829  B    W.              10/4/18;
                                                                 3/7/18
     Pte. Allcock, U. F.           27895  B    W.                3/8/18
     Sgt. Allen, W.                 5694  A    W.               30/7/17
     Sgt. Allen, W.               202665  A    W.               31/7/17
    +Pte. Allison, G.               2819  B    K. in A.         15/6/15
     Pte. Allison, H.              37257  A    W.               27/9/18
    +Pte. Almond, E.               41616  D    K. in A.          8/7/18
     Pte. Almond, J.                3016  B    W.              31/10/15
     Lance-Cpl. Almond, R.         27895  C    W.         N.T.   9/7/18
    +Pte. Almond, T.              201200  C    K. in A.        18/11/17
     Pte. Alker, T.                 4832  B    W.         N.T.   9/9/16
     Pte. Alsopp, A.                4858  A    W.                8/8/16
    +Pte. Alty, T.                202135  B    K. in A.         31/7/17
     Pte. Amatt, J.               235052  A    W.               31/7/17
     Pte. Amers, J.                30751  B    W.               30/9/18
    +Sgt. Anderson, A.             18387  A    K. in A.         1/10/18
     Sgt. Anderson, J. T.          41695  A    W.               15/8/18
    +Lance-Cpl. Anderton, J.       23156  C    K. in A.        18/11/17
     Pte. Anderton, J. H.          30663  C    W.                6/9/18
     Pte. Anderton, W.             16988  B    W.               31/7/17
     Pte. Andrew, J.               30607  B    W.               19/8/18
     Sgt. Anglezarke, J.            1334  D    W.               15/8/15
     Lance-Cpl. Anyon, T.            306  C    W.              28/10/15
                                                             and 9/9/16
    +Pte. Anyon, W.                 3959  C    D. of W.        17/11/15
    +Pte. Annes, W.                28202  -    D. of W.        19/11/17
    +Pte. Archer, E. H.           241234  B    D. of W.         17/6/18
    +Pte. Archer, J.               41614  D    K. in A.          8/7/17
     Pte. Archer, W.               28203  A    W.              30/10/18
     2nd Lieut. Archibald, D.        --   -    W.                5/8/18
    +Pte. Arkwright, F.            24074  C    K. in A.         20/9/17
    +Lance-Cpl. Armer, E.         201750  -    K. in A.         31/7/17
    +Pte. Armitage, E.            202831  B    K. in A.        18/11/17
     Pte. Armitstead, J.          201371  D    R.P. of W.        9/4/18
     Pte. Armstrong, H.             2451  D    R.P. of W.        9/4/18
    +Pte. Armstrong, W. F.          3232  C    K. in A.         15/6/15
    +Lance-Cpl. Arnold, F. G.     238005  A    K. in A.          9/4/18
    +Pte. Arstall, J. H.          202575  A    K. in A.         19/9/17
    +2nd Lieut. Ashcroft, G.         --   -    K. in A.         31/7/17
    +Pte. Ashes, H.                20505  B    K. in A.          9/4/18
     Sgt. Ashton, A.               24980  B    W.                9/4/18
     Pte. Ashton, E.                2937  B    W.               6/11/15
     Cpl. Ashton, J.              238011  C    W.               16/4/19
     Lance-Cpl. Ashton, T. J.      36384  D    W.               24/8/18
     Pte. Ashton, W.                4569  B    W.               31/7/17
     Pte. Ashton, W.               20237  B    W.               31/7/17
    +Cpl. Ashton, W.              202704  -    D. of W.         20/4/17
     Lance-Cpl. Ashworth, A.       41696  C    W.                5/9/18
     Pte. Ashworth, A.             41696  C    W.                3/9/18
     Pte. Ashworth, A.            200552  A    W.              24/10/18
    +Pte. Ashworth, J.              2622  C    K. in A.         15/6/15
    +Pte. Ashworth, J.              4035  -    K. in A.         29/5/16
    +Pte. Ashworth, J. R.          28205  B    K. in A.         29/5/18
     Pte. Ashworth, R.              6210  B    W.                9/9/16
     Pte. Ashworth, T.              2556  A    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Ashworth, W.            202792  A    W.               20/9/17
    +Cpl. Askew, A.                 2244  C    K. in A.          9/9/16
     Pte. Aspden, J.              202881  D    W.               31/7/17
     Pte. Aspden, J.                6267  D    W.               31/7/17
     Pte. Aspinall, A.              6322  D    W.                8/8/16
     Lance-Cpl. Aspinall, J.      202681  B    W.               11/6/17
     Pte. Aspinall, J.              5710  B    W.               11/6/17
     Pte. Astin, J.                 6265  D    W.               15/7/17
     Lance-Cpl. Astley, F.        242524  A    W.               14/5/18
     Pte. Astley, H.                7627  C    W.                8/8/16
     Lance-Cpl. Astley, J.           146  B    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Astwood, G. W.            6231  D    W.                9/9/16
    +Pte. Atherton, W.            201744  B    D. of W.         3/12/17
     Pte. Atherton, W.              2685  A    W.               31/7/17
     Pte. Atherton, W.              4483  B    W.                9/9/16
     Sgt. Atkinson, A.            202703  A    W.               10/4/18
                                                           and 23/10/18
    +Pte. Atkinson, F.              2615  C    K. in A.         15/6/15
     Pte. Atkinson, G. W.           3159  B    W.                9/9/16
     Pte. Atkinson, H.              4449  D    W.                9/9/16
     Pte. Atkinson, J.              2065  D    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Atkinson, L.             28204  A    W.              30/11/17
     Pte. Atkinson, T.             10701  B    W.               19/7/17


     Pte. Baxendale, W.             2032  C    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Battersby, A.             2273  B    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Baker, A.                 2407  B    W.               30/5/15
    +Pte. Ball, S. J.               2312  -    K. in A.         15/6/15
    +Pte. Baldwin, J.               1731  -    K. in A.        21/11/15
    +Pte. Bamber, A. J.             2806  -    K. in A.         15/6/15
    +Pte. Banister, R.            202637  -    K. in A.         31/7/17
     Pte. Bamber, J.                   3  B    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Banks S. E.              33215  C    R.P. of W.      18/11/17
    +Lance-Cpl. Baker, J. T.       23493  D    K. in A.        22/10/18
    +Lance-Cpl. Baron, J. E.       13520  B    K. in A.         1/10/18
     Pte. Barrett, J. R.           29087  A    W.               30/9/18
     Pte. Bassett, C.              35677  -    W.               1/10/18
     Pte. Barry, J.               242209  D    W.               1/10/18
     Sgt. Bamford, M. S.          203018  B    W.         N.T. 13/10/18
    +Pte. Barnes, F.               30608  D    D. of W.        10/11/18
     Lance-Cpl. Bates, F. W.      202793  A    W.              23/10/18
     Pte. Bailey, H.               24818  B    W.              23/10/18
     Pte. Ball, H.                  1412  D    W.               15/6/15
                                                             and 1/4/16
    +Lance-Cpl. Bamber, E. H.       1648  B    K. in A.         15/6/15
     Pte. Bamber, R. H.             1653  A    W.               15/6/15
     Lance-Cpl. Ball, F.            1775  A    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Baines, J. G.             2250  B    W.               30/5/15
     Pte. Bamford, J.               3503  C    W.               20/5/16
     Pte. Barlow, F.                4860  B    W.               30/7/16
     Sgt. Bates, A. E.               274  A    W.                3/8/16
     Pte. Bamford, T.               3074  A    W.                5/8/16
     Cpl. Batty, F.                  238  B    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Banks, J.                 3938  C    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Barton, A.                3971  D    W.         N.T.   8/8/16
    +Pte. Baxendale, G.             3914  D    K. in A.          8/8/16
     Pte Barnes, J.                 4523  B    W.         N.T.   8/9/16
    +Pte. Baines, L.                4000  B    K. in A.          9/9/16
    +Pte. Ball, E.                  4439  C    K. in A.          9/9/16
    +Pte Baines, T.                 4029  A    K. in A.          9/9/16
     Pte. Barnes, J.                4828  B    W.         N.T.   8/9/16
     Pte. Barlow, W. H.             2267  D    W.               28/9/16
    +Pte. Bamish, W.                4002  C    K. in A.          8/8/16
    +Pte. Barlow, F.                1055  -    K. in A.         15/6/15
    +Pte. Barnett, H. L.            3321  -    K. in A.         15/6/15
    +Pte. Bateson, W.               2621  -    K. in A.         15/6/15
    +Pte. Bath, F.                 16896  -    K. in A.         20/9/17
    +Pte. Baxendale, J.              141  -    K. in A.         15/6/15
     Pte. Barton, A.                3231  B    W.               29/9/16
     Pte. Baxendale, R.           201726  C    W.               13/5/17
     Pte. Bamber, W.              200536  A    W.               23/5/17
     Pte. Battersby, W.           202658  D    W.               12/7/17
     Pte. Bamber, W.              201251  D    W.               14/7/17
     Pte. Barron, H.               36907  C    W.               18/7/17
     Pte. Barton, A.              200995  B    W.               31/7/17
     Pte. Bancroft, L.            202884  D    W.               31/7/17
     Lance-Sgt. Batty, F.         200116  B    R.P. of W.       31/7/17
     Lance-Cpl. Barnes, A.        202115  B    W.               31/7/17
     Pte. Backhouse, L.           202970  C    W.               31/7/17
     Pte. Bates, G. W.             36159  B    W.               27/5/17
     Pte. Barrow, J.              201121  B    W.                3/6/18
     Pte. Barrett, W.              38678  A    W.                7/7/18
     Pte. Barnes, F.               30608  D    W.               16/8/18
     Pte. Balmer, R. W.            28220  B    W.                5/9/18
     Pte. Baron, H.                30921  A    W.                8/9/18
     Pte. Baron, J. W.             24769  -    W.               13/9/18
    +Pte. Barlow, A.               36808  A    W.                2/6/18
                                               K. in A.         23/9/18
     Pte. Barker, W.               36158  D    W.               29/7/17
     2nd Lieut. Baker, E. G.         --   -    W.               20/9/17
    +Capt. Baker, F. S.              --   -    K. in A.         20/9/17
     Pte. Barton, R.              290194  B    W.               20/9/17
    +Pte. Baines A.               290200  D    W.               20/9/17
                                               K. in A.          4/4/18
    +Lance-Cpl. Ball, R.           13057  B    K. in A.         20/9/17
     Pte Barker, W.               202971  C    W.               20/9/17
    +Pte. Baxendale, J.           202607  A    K. in A.        30/10/18
     Pte. Balding, B. J.          290630  C    R.P. of W.      18/11/17
    +Pte. Baxter, C. E.            34907  C    K. in A.        20/11/17
     Pte. Bamber, W.              201209  B    W.              20/11/17
     Pte. Burscough, A.           201646  D    W.              30/11/17
     Pte. Battersby, J. W.        202658  D    W.              30/11/17
    +Pte. Ball, J.                201506  B    K. in A.          9/4/18
    +Cpl. Bamber, J.              200174  A    K. in A.         11/4/18
     Pte. Barlow, S.               13618  D    W.                9/4/18
     Pte. Bamish, J.              201447  D    W.                9/4/18
    +Pte. Baines, A.              290200  D    K. in A.         12/4/18
     Pte. Bailey, J.               27910  D    R.P. of W.       12/4/18
     Pte. Balmforth, C.           290631  C    W.               15/4/18
    +Cpl. Bailey, J.               30459  A    K. in A.         14/5/18
    +Pte. Bamford, H.              24675  D    K. in A.         15/5/18
     Pte. Bates, J.               200146  C    W.               19/5/18
     Lance-Cpl. Bates, J.          30472  C    W.               19/5/18
     Cpl. Bateson, F.              19622  B    W.         N.T.  27/5/15
     Pte. Bennett, R.             200453  A    W.               15/6/15
     Cpl. Bennett, J.                261  C    W.               15/6/15
    +Pte. Bentham, J.                278  C    Died            27/10/18
     Pte. Bennett, J.                318  D    W.               15/6/15
    +Pte. Beaver, D.                2299  A    D. of W.          8/8/16
     Cpl. Bennett, E.             202620  B    W.               30/9/18
     Pte. Beardsworth, A.           1439  D    W.               15/6/15
                                                             and 9/9/16
     Sgt. Bell, T. B.               1003  C    W.               30/5/15
                                                             and 7/9/16
    +Lieut. Best, F. R.              --   -    K. in A.          1/1/16
    +Pte. Benson, H.                2130  B    K. in A.          4/6/16
     Pte. Berry, E.                 4864  B    W.                2/8/16
     Pte. Bell, R.                  4853  B    W.                4/8/16
     Pte. Bennett. J.               2006  B    W.                8/8/16
    +Cpl. Beesley, R. H.          200189  -    K. in A.         31/7/17
    +Pte. Berry, W.                 2904  -    D. of W.         19/9/15
    +Sgt. Bent, A.                  3033  -    Died             27/1/15
     Cpl. Belfield, J.               264  B    W.                9/9/16
    +Sgt. Bettley, W. B.             301  B    D. of W.        26/9/16;
                                                               12/10/16
     Pte. Beetham, A.               3221  B    W.               26/9/16
     Lance-Sgt. Bell, T.            5601  C    W.               3/11/16
     Pte. Bevins, G. S.           202506  C    W.                1/6/17
     Pte. Bennett, C. H.          202623  B    W.                4/6/17
     Pte. Berry, B.               202885  -    W.               31/7/17
     Pte. Beck, W.                 29401  C    W.                1/6/18
    +Pte. Beardwell, W. H.         30215  D    K. in A.         16/6/18
     Pte. Berrington, J.           26492  B    W.         N.T.   5/9/18
     Pte. Beardsworth, A.         200276  D    W.                7/9/18
    +Pte. Berry, W. E.             32681  A    K. in A.         11/9/18
     Pte. Berry, E.               202040  B    W.               23/9/18
    +Pte. Bennett, W.              21342  B    D. of W.         17/9/17
     Pte. Bennett, J. T. R.       290692  C    W.               21/9/17
     Pte. Berrington, E.           24919  B    W.               20/9/17
    +Lance-Sgt. Beaumont, W.      265280  A    K. in A.         20/9/17
     Pte. Beardwood, H.           200011  C    W.               20/9/17
     Pte. Bean, H.                202614  C    R.P. of W.      18/11/17
     Pte. Belgin, F.               28217  D    W.              18/11/17
    +Pte Best, J.                  37744  B    K. in A.          9/4/18
     Pte. Bennett, H.              35300  D    W.               11/4/18
    +Sgt. Beechey, T. J. D.       202933  C    D. of W.        14/4/18;
                                                                17/4/18
     2nd Lieut. Beresford, G. G.     --   -    W.                9/4/18
     Pte. Beaman, G. E.            34332  B    W.                9/4/18
     Pte. Billington, S.            2029  A    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Birch, R.                 2235  A    W.               15/6/15
     Sgt. Birtwistle, H.          238023  A    R.P. of W.      13/10/18
    +Pte. Billington, R.            3169  B    K. in A.         15/6/15
     Pte. Bibby, J.                  784  B    W.              30/10/15
    +Pte. Bilsborough, R.           4400  A    K. in A.          2/8/16
     Pte. Billington, W.            3190  A    W.                8/8/16
     Sgt. Bibby, J.                  208  C    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Billington, E.            3351  B    W.                8/8/16
     2nd Lieut. Bigger, T. A.        --   -    W.                8/8/16
    +Pte. Bingham, H.             200600  A    D. of W.          8/4/17
     Pte. Binks, W.               235019  C    W.               13/4/17
     Lance-Cpl. Billington, T.    201622  B    W.               12/7/17
     Pte. Birmingham, J.          202466  D    W.         N.T.  14/4/17
     Pte. Bickerstaffe, R.        200695  B    W.               31/7/17
    +Pte. Bishop, A.              202794  A    K. in A.         31/7/17
    +Pte. Bibby, R.               202705  B    K. in A.         31/7/17
    +Pte. Bibby, T.               200271  D    K. in A.         31/7/17
     Pte Birch, L.                201814  D    W.                3/6/18
    +Pte. Bibby, J. W.             23691  A    K. in A.         20/9/17
     Pte. Birchenough, H. E.      202904  C    W.              18/11/17
     Sgt. Bishop                     --   A    W.              20/11/17
     Pte. Bibby, J.               200190  B    W.              30/11/17
     Pte. Bibby, C.                28065  B    W.              30/11/17
     Lance-Sgt. Bingham, J.       200606  D    W.              30/11/17
     Pte. Bibby, J.               238012  B    W.         N.T.  21/3/18
    +Pte. Billington, R. G.        29078  B    K. in A.         13/4/18
     Pte. Birch, A.                28212  D    W.               12/4/18
    +Pte. Birch, F.                37572  B    W.               20/9/17
                                               D. of W.         10/5/18
     Pte. Birmingham, J.          244766  D    W.               25/5/18
     Pte. Bleasdale, C.           200576  A    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Blackshaw, J.              262  C    W.               15/6/15
     2nd Lieut. Blount, G. A.        --   -    Missing         23/10/18
    +Cpl. Blackledge, H.            1469  D    K. in A.         15/6/15
    +Pte. Bland, R.                 1453  C    K. in A.         15/6/15
     Pte. Blundell, J.             13434  C    W.         N.T.   3/7/16
     Pte. Blakeley, W.              4558  C    W.               13/8/16
     Lance-Cpl. Bloom, H.         202574  B    W.               31/7/17
    +Lance-Cpl. Blackledge, A.      1393  -    K. in A.         15/6/15
     Pte. Blaylock, G. F.         202883  D    W.               17/8/18
     Lance-Cpl. Bland, W.          21051  C    W.                4/9/18
    +Pte. Blackledge, M.           22904  C    K. in A.         31/7/17
     Pte. Blackhurst, J.          203012  D    W.               20/9/17
     Pte. Blackburn, R.           202343  A    W.         N.T.  20/9/17
    +Pte. Bleasdale, J.           203865  D    K. in A.        30/11/17
     Pte. Blackborough, W.        235004  D    W.         N.T. 30/11/17
    +Pte. Bloy, A.                 35565  B    K. in A.          9/4/18
    +Pte. Blakeley, W.            201784  C    K. in A.          9/4/18
     Pte. Blackborough, W. H. S.   28218  D    W.               18/5/18
     Pte. Bowling, J.               2076  D    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Bond, F.                  2531  B    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Bolan, J.                 2741  C    W.               15/6/16
     Pte. Boardman, J.            235048  C    W.         N.T.  23/7/18
     Capt. Bolingbroke, C. B.        --   -    W.         N.T.   9/9/16
     Pte. Bolton, C. A.            29402  D    W.               30/9/18
     Sgt. Bolton, W.                 392  A    W.               15/6/15
     Cpl. Booth, R.                 1362  D    W.               15/6/15
     Lance-Cpl. Boardman, G.        1427  D    W.               15/6/15
     Sgt. Boardman, G.              1427  D    W.               26/9/16
    +Pte. Bonny, J. C.              2012  C    K. in A.         31/5/15
     Pte. Bowker, T.                2784  B    W.                9/9/15
     Pte. Bolton, J.                1760  A    W.              21/10/15
     Sgt. Board, A.                  165  D    W.                5/8/16
     Pte. Booth, J.                 1498  A    W.                4/8/16
     Pte. Bootle, S.                3867  C    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Bowes, T.                 4586  C    R.P. of W.        8/8/16
     Lance-Cpl. Boyle, W.           2403  B    W.                9/9/16
     Pte. Bond, G.                235051  D    W.               17/5/17
    +Sgt. Boothroyd, F.           202730  D    K. in A.         18/5/17
    +Pte. Booth, W.               203794  A    K. in A.         31/7/17
    +Pte. Boast, W. R.                19  -    K. in A.         15/6/15
    +Pte. Bolton, C.                1381  -    K. in A.         15/6/15
    +Pte. Bond, H.                201644  -    K. in A.         31/7/17
    +Pte. Bone, W.                  1616  -    Died             25/1/16
    +Pte. Braithwaite, F. J.        2557  -    K. in A.         15/6/15
    +Pte. Briggs, J.                2225  -    K. in A.         18/8/16
    +Pte. Booth, W. H.            203564  A    K. in A.         31/7/17
     Pte. Bond, R.                235139  A    W.               31/7/17
     Pte. Bottoms, F.             203610  C    W.                3/6/18
     Pte. Booth, H.                39947  B    W.         N.T.  16/6/18
     Pte. Bourne, W.               34878  A    W.               14/9/18
     2nd Lieut. Bowler, F. C.        --   -    W.               30/9/18
     Pte. Booth, S. G.            202577  D    W.               20/9/17
    +Pte. Bolton, J. T.            31907  A    K. in A.         20/9/17
    +Pte. Boyle, J.                35575  C    K. in A.         20/9/17
    +Pte. Bond, J.                 37599  A    W.               20/9/17
                                               K. in A.        30/11/17
     Pte. Bostock, E.              28213  B    W.              30/11/17
     Pte. Bott, A. J.              12175  D    W.              30/11/17
     Pte. Bond, A.                 28208  D    R.P. of W.       17/2/18
    +Pte. Bolan, J.               200712  C    K. in A.          9/4/18
     Pte. Boon, T.                 34868  C    W.                9/4/18
     Pte. Bounds, J. H.            28214  B    W.               13/4/18
    +Pte. Booth, F.                36387  C    K. in A.         10/5/18
     Pte. Bolton, J.              240906  C    W.               11/5/18
     Pte. Brindle, G.               1906  A    W.               29/5/15
     Pte. Brooks, E.                2821  C    W.               31/5/15
     Pte. Brierley, T.                48  B    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Bretherton, E.              89  B    W.               15/6/15
     2nd Lieut. Brindle, J. L.       --   -    W.               15/6/15
    +Capt. Brindle, J. L.            --   -    Died at Home     13/3/18
     Pte. Brandwood, G.           201626  A    W.                2/8/17
    +Pte. Brooks, C.               28215  A    K. in A.        30/11/17
     Pte. Brindle, W.              13294  -    W.               30/9/18
    +Pte. Bradshaw, E.             30923  A    K. in A.        13/10/18
     Pte. Bromilow, J.             30913  B    W.              13/10/18
     Pte. Brown, A.               235498  B    W.         N.T. 17/10/18
    +Pte. Bury, R.                  2857  -    K. in A.         15/6/15
     Pte. Bretherton, E.            1675  B    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Brindle, G.               1906  A    W.               29/5/15
     Pte. Brooks, E.                2821  C    W.               30/5/15
     2nd Lieut. Bryce-Smith, H.      --   -    W.               30/5/15
     Lance-Cpl. Brennan, J.         1292  C    W.               8/11/15
     Pte. Brown, J.                 4852  C    W.               28/6/16
    +Pte. Brierley, W.              1946  B    K. in A.         28/6/16
     Pte. Bradley, A.               3436  C    W.                6/8/16
    +Pte. Brierley, H.              3913  A    K. in A.          8/8/16
    +Cpl. Bridge, H.                1449  C    K. in A.          8/8/16
     Pte. Bradshaw, H.               164  B    W.                8/8/16
     Sgt. Brown, B.                 2292  C    W.                9/9/16
     Pte. Brooks, F.                4859  B    W.                9/9/16
     Pte. Briggs, F.                4862  A    W.               6/11/16
     Lance-Sgt. Brown, A.           5600  B    W.              24/11/16
     Pte. Briggs, J.              202071  B    W.         N.T.   2/6/17
     Pte. Brierley, J. H.          31937  D    W.         N.T.  31/5/17
     Pte. Briggs, E.              202834  B    W.                4/6/17
     Pte. Brooks, F.              202035  B    W.                7/6/17
     Cpl. Brooks, B.              202650  C    W.               18/7/17
    +Pte. Brown, G.               202601  A    K. in A.         18/7/17
     Pte. Brewin, M.              202849  B    W.               31/7/17
     Pte. Bradbury, J.            203770  B    W.               31/7/17
     Pte. Broad, J.               201576  A    W.               31/7/17
    +Pte. Bradley, J.             235031  A    K. in A.         31/7/17
     Lance-Cpl. Bradley, C.       201218  B    W.               31/7/17
     Cpl. Brennand, F.            200740  B    W.               31/7/17
    +Pte. Breakell, R.            203145  B    K. in A.         31/7/17
    +Pte. Breckon, G.             242983  D    K. in A           2/6/18
     Pte. Bradnum, H.              41621  D    W.               16/8/18
     Pte. Bridge, J.               32993  D    W.               16/8/18
     Pte. Bradley, J.              41622  B    W.         N.T.  19/8/18
     Pte. Breakell, S.            201271  D    W.         N.T.   4/9/18
     2nd Lieut. Bratton              --   -    W.              30/10/15
     Pte. Brown, C.                30693  C    W.                5/9/18
     Pte. Brown, J.                30957  B    W.               14/9/18
     Pte. Bromley. C.              27110  C    W.               20/9/17
     Cpl. Briggs, F.              202038  A    W.               20/9/17
    +Cpl. Brooks, B.              202650  C    K. in A.         20/9/17
     Pte. Bramall, J.             244993  C    W.               20/9/17
     Pte. Brown, L.                28222  C    R.P. of W.      18/11/17
    +Pte. Bramwell, T.             37632  B    K. in A.        18/11/17
     Pte. Brierley, H.             25538  A    W.              30/11/17
    +Pte. Brown, R.                15103  D    K. in A.        30/11/17
    +Pte. Bradley, E.             201241  D    K. in A.        30/11/17
     Pte. Briggs, W.               31589  D    W.              30/11/17
    +Pte. Brown, H.                37313  D    K. in A.         26/3/18
     Pte. Brown, H.                28224  A    W.               28/3/17
    +2nd Lieut. Brooke, L.           --   -    K. in A.          8/4/18
     Pte. Bradburn, B.             10712  B    R.P. of W.        9/4/18
     Cpl. Brindle, A.             202037  B    W.                9/4/18
    +Pte. Brown, E.                28155  C    K. in A.          9/4/18
     Pte. Brown, T.                25173  C    W.                9/4/18
     Sgt. Brough, R.              247009  D    Missing    N.T.   9/4/18
     Pte. Burgh, H.                 2057  D    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Burns, W.                 2617  C    W.               15/6/15
    +Pte. Bushles, J.             200920  D    K. in A.         21/7/18
    +Capt. Buckmaster, R. N. L.       --  -    K. in A.        30/11/17
     Pte. Butler, L. O.            10604  B    W.         N.T.  30/9/18
     Lieut. Bury, W. H.              --   -    W.                9/9/16
                                                           and 16/10/18
     Pte. Burke, T.                29431  B    W.              23/10/18
     C.S.M. Burke, J.               2200  B    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Butcher, R.                775  B    W.               15/6/15
    +Pte. Burns, F.                 2886  B    K. in A.         15/6/15
    +Pte. Ball, R.                  3520  D    K. in A.         3/11/15
     Pte. Ball, H.                  1412  D    W.                1/4/16
     Pte. Butler, S.                2503  A    W.               31/7/16
     Pte. Burt, H.                243188  D    W.                5/8/16
     Pte. Burt, J.                  3081  C    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Burscough, A.             4293  C    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Bunting, W.               3919  C    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Burke, W.                  246  C    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Buttry, R.                1790  B    W.                8/8/16
     2nd Lieut. Bury, W. H.          --   -    W.                9/9/16
     Pte. Burrows, E.               4425  B    W.                9/9/16
     Pte. Buckell, H.               2048  B    W.                9/9/16
     Pte. Buckingham, F.            6213  B    Missing           9/9/16
     Pte. Baker, J.                19738  C    W.               19/5/17
     Pte. Butterworth, H.         200821  B    W.               13/7/17
     Pte. Bustin, E.              202758  -    W.               31/7/17
     Lance-Cpl. Butcher, T.       201260  B    W.               31/7/17
     Pte. Buckley, A.              29718  -    W.               31/7/17
     Lance-Cpl. Buckley, F.       238013  D    W.         N.T.  31/7/17
     Pte. Bulgar, P.              203906  B    R.P. of W.       31/7/17
     Lance-Cpl. Buck, J.           18287  D    W.               17/8/18
     Pte. Burke, S.                31560  B    W.               24/8/18
     Pte. Butterworth, J.          25558  C    W.                3/9/18
     Lieut. Bulling, A. E.           --   -    W.               1/10/18
     Pte. Buth, F.                 16896  D    W.               20/9/17
    +Pte. Bullough, C.            202168  C    K. in A.         31/7/17
     Pte. Burke, E.                32155  C    W.              18/11/17
     Pte. Burrows, H.             202616  C    W.              18/11/17
    +Pte. Butler, F.               24536  A    K. in A.        20/11/17
    +Pte. Budd, W.                 28209  C    K. in A.        18/11/17
     Pte. Buckley, L.              28223  A    W.              30/11/17
     Lance-Cpl. Buck, J.           18287  D    W.               21/3/18
     Pte. Burns, J. H.             34925  D    Missing    N.T.  12/4/18
     Pte. Butler, A.               25219  D    W.               12/4/18
     Pte. Burns, H.                21757  B    W.         N.T.  28/4/18
    +Pte. Butler, S.              200597  A    D. of W.        14/5/18;
                                                                19/5/18
     Pte. Bythell, C. T.          243876  A    W.               24/3/18
     Pte. Byrom, L.               202781  B    W.               31/7/17
    +2nd Lieut. Byrne, W.            --   -    K. in A.         30/9/18
     Pte. Byrom, S.                41623  A    W.               14/5/18


     Pte. Cardwell, T.              4612  B    W.                9/9/16
     Pte. Cartmell, E. G.            305  C    W.               15/6/15
                                                            and 26/9/16
     Pte. Cartmell, W.               336  A    W.               15/6/15
                                                            and 26/9/16
     Sgt. Cash, S.                  6174  A    W.               28/9/16
     Lance-Cpl. Caffery, J.         2106  C    W.               28/9/16
     Pte. Caine, F.                26841  D    W.                4/6/17
     Rev. Caley, W. L. B.            --  Chap-
                                         lain  W.               31/7/17
     Pte. Cawham, H.                3395  A    W.               31/7/17
     Pte. Callon, W.                3902  D    W.                5/8/16
    +Pte. Castle, J.                4539  A    K. in A.          8/8/16
     Pte. Calligan, R.              4614  C    W.                8/8/16
     Sgt. Carter, T.                 322  C    W.               13/8/16
     Pte. Cavies, T.                3250  C    W.                9/9/16
     Pte. Caddich, J.               4308  C    W.         N.T.   9/9/16
    +Pte. Carter, G. T.             2953  B    K. in A.         14/6/15
     Pte. Catterall, J.             4304  A    W.               26/3/16
                                                             and 8/8/16
    +Pte. Catterall, P.             1442  D    K. in A.          1/4/16
    +Pte. Carter, W.                1909  C    K. in A.         23/4/16
     Pte. Cain, E.                    30  B    W.               26/5/16
     Lance-Cpl. Caton, J. C.          42  B    W.               28/6/16
    +Pte. Calder, J. H.             2995  C    K. in A.         28/6/16
     Pte. Caffery, T. J.            1095  C    W.               26/6/16
     Lance-Cpl. Calderbank, H.      1645  A    W.                3/8/16
     Lance-Cpl. Caffery, J.         2106  C    W.                5/8/16
     Lance-Cpl. Cartmell, W.      200173  A    W.                2/8/17
     Pte. Carrington, G.          202157  C    W.               31/7/17
    +Sgt. Calvert, W.             235007  C    D. of W.         26/8/18
    +Pte. Catterall, M.             9244  D    K. in A.        20/11/17
    +Pte. Cavanagh, J. W.         204880  -    Died             10/7/17
     Pte. Calvert, W. H.           28229  B    W.              20/11/17
     Lance-Cpl. Caton, R.         200545  A    W.              20/11/17
     Pte. Catterall, G.            28233  A    W.              20/11/17
     Pte. Calvert, J.               2654  B    W.               15/6/15
    +Pte. Cashmore, H. W.           2917  D    K. in A.         15/6/15
    +Pte. Catterall, L.             2665  A    K. in A.         15/6/15
    +Pte. Calder, J. H.             2995  D    K. in A.         28/6/18
    +Pte. Carney, F. R. J.         28246  A    K. in A.        30/11/17
     Pte. Cadd, W.                 29263  A    R.P. of W.      23/10/18
     Pte. Cass, T.                 38883  A    W.         N.T.  11/9/18
     2nd Lieut. Cairns, J.           --   -    W.               30/9/18
    +Pte. Carter, H.               38666  B    K. in A.         1/10/18
     Sgt. Cayton, T.               12154  B    W.               30/9/18
     Pte. Carroll, E. S.           30959  C    W.               1/10/18
    +Pte. Carlill, A.              31006  B    K. in A.         4/11/18
     Pte. Cartwright, G.           10274  A    W.         N.T.  23/5/18
                                                           and 29/10/18
    +Pte. Carr, S.                201436  C    D. of W.         24/5/18
     Pte. Cartwright, J.            2320  B    W.               16/6/18
     Pte. Carrodus, R.             31874  B    W.                3/7/18
     Pte. Cardwell, A.             28225  D    W.                9/7/18
     Pte. Carroll, J.              29405  D    W.               16/8/18
     Pte. Cartmell, J.             27998  D    W.               17/8/18
    +Sgt. Calvert, W.             235007  B    D. of W.         25/8/18
     Pte. Cardwell, A.             28225  D    W.               21/8/18
     Pte. Carr, C.                  3685  B    W.         N.T.   4/9/18
     Lance-Cpl. Cavies, T.        201009  B    W.               31/7/17
     Cpl. Cavies, T.              201009  B    W.                4/9/18
    +Pte. Capley, C.                9024  B    K. in A.         15/4/18
     Capt. Collett, C. G.            --   -    W.               15/4/18
    +Cpl. Carson, W.              240177  A    K. in A.          9/4/18
     Pte. Carroll, J.              29405  D    W.               25/4/18
     Pte. Catterall, J.           201653  A    W.               26/4/18
     Capt. Carmichael, D.            --   -    W.               20/4/18
     Pte. Carpenter, G.            34323  D    W.              30/11/17
     Pte. Casson, J.               28227  A    W.                2/5/18
     Pte. Chapman, J.               6149  C    W.               26/9/16
     Pte. Churm, F. L.            200232  C    W.         N.T.  21/7/17
     Pte. Chapman, R.               3844  D    W.                8/8/16
    +Pte. Charnley, T. A.           4017  D    K. in A.          8/8/16
    +Pte. Chapman, C.               3842  D    K. in A.          9/9/16
     Pte. Chapman, J.               4746  C    W.         N.T.   9/9/16
    +Pte. Chadwick, J.              2052  D    W.               15/6/15
                                               D. of W.         31/7/16
     Pte. Charnley, J.              1931  C    W.                5/8/16
    +Pte. Charnley, F. C.          11186  B    K. in A.         31/7/17
     Pte. Chipperfield, A. F.      34942  C    R.P. of W.      18/11/17
     Pte. Chadderton, J.          202578  B    W.              21/11/17
    +Pte. Child, J. J.              3001  A    K. in A.         15/6/15
    +Pte. Chapple, G.               3360  D    K. in A.         16/6/15
     Pte. Christian, J.             4202  A    W.                9/9/16
     Pte. Charnley, J.            200422  B    W.               12/7/17
     Pte. Chettleburgh, J. W.      29725  C    W.               31/7/17
     Pte. Chambers, E. E.          41780  C    W.                5/9/18
     Pte. Charlton, J.             31009  C    W.               1/10/18
     2nd Lieut. Chambers, J.         --   -    Missing         23/10/18
     2nd Lieut. Chapman, B. R. W.    --   -    W.               17/5/18
     Cpl. Charlesworth, J.         25487  C    W.               19/5/18
    +Pte. Carishem, T.             41086  D    K. in A.          2/6/18
     Pte. Charnley, C.             36733  D    K. in A.          9/4/18
     Pte. Chorley, J.             235163  B    Missing    N.T.  13/4/18
     Pte. Chorlton, T. A.          29097  B    W.                9/4/18
     Pte. Clayton, G.               1424  C    W.               27/9/16
     Pte. Clayton, G.             200270  C    W.               13/7/17
                                                             and 2/9/18
     Pte. Clayton, H.               4068  D    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Clarke, E.                4680  B    W.         N.T.   9/9/16
     Lance-Cpl. Clarke, G.          2240  A    W.                9/9/16
    +Pte. Clough, J.                2575  C    K. in A.          9/9/16
     Pte. Clement, H.               4319  C    W.         N.T.   9/9/16
     Sgt. Clayton, S. T.            1284  C    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Clarkson, T.              2657  C    W.               26/4/16
    +Pte. Clarke, J.                  35  A    K. in A.         28/6/16
    +Sgt. Clarke, J. B.            21008  A    K. in A.   N.T.  28/6/16
     Lance-Cpl. Clough, J.          2575  C    W.                1/8/16
     Pte. Clarkson, J. R.           3080  C    W.                5/8/16
     Pte. Clark, W.                 3297  A    Missing    N.T.   2/8/17
     Pte. Clarkson, R.            200571  C    W.               31/7/17
     Pte. Clay, J.                200660  A    W.               20/9/17
    +Pte. Clayton, S.               2059  D    K. in A.         15/6/15
    +Pte. Clark, W.                41709  -    K. in A.         30/9/18
    +Cpl. Clarkson, L.              1419  D    W.               15/6/15
                                               K. in A.         28/6/16
     Pte. Clarkson, W. H.           1916  A    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Clarke, J.               28158  C    W.                4/9/18
    +Pte. Clarke, L. G.            28232  B    Presumed Killed   9/4/18
     Pte. Clarke, J.              240241  B    R.P. of W.        9/4/18
     Pte. Clarke, J.              201441  D    W.               13/4/18
    +Pte. Clarke, R. T.            28231  B    K. in A.         14/9/18
     Pte. Clayton, E. H.           28228  C    W.                9/4/18
     Pte. Clare, P.                20549  C    W.               27/4/18
    +Pte. Clarkson, H.               120  A    K. in A.         15/6/15
    +Cpl. Collier, J.             201078  -    K. in A.         1/12/17
    +Pte. Collier, S.             202740  -    K. in A.          9/9/16
    +Pte. Commons, E.                140  -    K. in A.         16/6/15
     Pte. Cottom, W.                3912  C    Missing           9/9/16
    +Pte. Corless, H.               3398  C    D. of W.         2/10/16
     Pte. Cooper, G.                3046  D    W.               26/9/16
     Pte. Corcorn, T.             202043  A    W.                2/6/17
     Pte. Collins, A.             202621  -    W.                5/6/17
     Pte. Counsell, J.             18740  B    W.               10/7/17
     Pte. Cooper, G.              200875  A    W.               15/7/17
     Pte. Coley, T.                34336  B    W.               15/7/17
     Pte. Coote, W.               200595  A    W.         N.T.  18/7/17
     R.S.M. Corns, R.             200182  D    W.               18/7/17
    +Pte. Coe, S. C.               26005  C    K. in A.         21/7/17
     Sgt. Cookson, J.             200158  C    W.               21/7/17
     Pte. Coulton, L.             200966  -    W.         N.T.  31/7/17
     Lance-Sgt. Collins, W.         2239  A    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Cox, T.                   4871  C    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Cocker, T.                4629  C    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Collier, T.               5538  C    W.         N.T.   8/8/16
     Lance-Cpl. Corner, H.          4479  D    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Comber, T.                3664  C    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Cookson, J.               3903  C    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Coxhead, R.               3530  C    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Cowley, C.                5011  B    W.                8/9/16
     Pte. Corless, H.               3398  C    W.                9/9/16
     Pte. Cocker, W.                3774  C    W.                9/9/16
    +Pte. Costello, E. G.           4873  A    K. in A.          9/9/16
     Pte. Collins. W.               3790  B    W.         N.T.   9/9/16
     Pte. Cowell, C.                1487  D    W.                9/9/16
     Pte. Cowell, R.                3056  B    W.               14/6/15
     Pte. Collinson, W. E.          1373  D    W.               14/6/15
     Pte. Cookson, J.                314  C    W.               15/6/15
                                                            and 30/5/18
     Pte. Compton, T.                129  D    W.         N.T.  20/4/16
    +Pte. Connolly, W.              1462  -    K. in A.         15/6/15
    +Pte. Connor, C. J.            32142  -    D. of W.         26/3/18
    +Cpl. Coupe, R.                 2525  -    K. in A.         14/7/16
    +Pte. Coupe, T.                    6  -    K. in A.         11/9/15
    +Pte. Croston, A.                 28  -    K. in A.        16/10/14
     Pte. Coxhead, R.               3530  C    W.         N.T.   3/7/16
     Pte. Corless, H.               3398  C    W.                4/7/16
     Pte. Cox, T.                   4871  C    W.                5/7/16
     Cpl. Cowburn, W.                783  D    W.         N.T.   5/8/16
     Pte. Cottom, R.              200751  C    W.         N.T.  31/7/17
                                                            and 20/9/17
     Pte. Coulton, L.             202966  A    W.               31/7/17
                                                            and 20/9/17
     Lance-Cpl. Cooper, J. C.     202104  D    W.               20/9/17
     Lance-Cpl. Conway, J.         26812  A    W.              30/10/17
    +Pte. Coupe, T.                 4119  C    K. in A.         11/9/15
     Pte. Collins, R.              28045  C    W.         N.T. 18/11/17
     Pte. Cornwell, J. A.         202631  A    W.              20/11/17
     Pte. Conlon, R.               28226  A    W.              30/11/17
     Pte. Corrie, T.                3061  B    W.         N.T. 30/11/17
     Pte. Colvin, J.                2400  C    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Coupe, F.                 2678  A    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Corry, J.                  144  B    W.               15/6/15
    +Pte. Cortman, F.               1429  D    K. in A.         15/6/15
    +Pte. Cocker, E.                2088  D    K. in A.         15/6/15
     Pte. Cookson, J.               3038  C    Missing          15/6/15
     Pte. Corfield, J. E.          29403  D    K. in A.         17/6/18
     Pte. Cocking, E.               3967  A    W.                9/9/16
     Pte. Cockran, A.              30612  B    W.                5/9/18
     Lance-Cpl. Coleman, R.        26009  A    W.               30/9/18
     Pte. Connolly, J.             41711  B    W.               30/9/18
     Pte. Commins, A. S. G.        30362  A    R.P. of W.      23/10/18
     Pte. Cones, G. E.             21455  A    W.              23/10/18
    +Pte. Cookson, T.             202541  A    D. of W.       24/10/18;
                                                               27/10/18
     Sgt. Corns, E.                 1435  B    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Cowell, C.                1487  D    W.               15/6/15
     Lance-Cpl. Collins, W.         2239  A    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Connors, J.              28238  A    W.               14/5/18
    +2nd Lieut. Cooper, W. R.        --   -    K. in A.         14/5/18
     Pte. Corry, J.               202061  D    W.         N.T.  14/5/18
     C.Q.M.S. Cosgrove, J.         34979  B    W.               14/5/18
     Pte. Coop, F.                 61215  A    W.         N.T.  29/5/18
     Sgt. Cookson, J.             200158  C    W.               30/5/18
     Pte. Coleman, E. A.           29912  A    W.                1/6/18
     Cpl. Collier, F. W.          202905  C    W.                2/6/18
     Pte. Coleman, W.             238027  D    W.                2/6/18
     Pte. Coyle, W.                41630  D    W.                2/6/18
     2nd Lieut. Cowan, C. B.         --   -    W.                5/8/16
     Pte. Cox, E.                  26224  C    W.                3/9/18
     Pte. Coley, T.                34336  B    W.              30/11/17
     Pte. Cook, H. J.              28230  B    W.              30/11/17
    +Pte. Colleney, T.             14568  B    D. of W.         5/12/17
     Pte. Cooper, G.              290769  C    W.               13/4/18
     Pte. Colquhoun, C. W.         35673  D    W.               11/4/18
     Pte. Cox, J.                 240515  B    W.               16/4/18
     Pte. Cox, J.                  29404  C    W.                1/5/18
     Pte. Crook, G.                 3859  A    W.               29/9/16
     Pte. Crompton, B.              4672  B    W.               10/1/17
     Pte. Crompton, S.             31605  C    W.               19/5/17
     Pte. Crook, W.                25634  D    W.               27/5/17
     Pte. Craig, J.               235032  A    W.                6/5/17
    +Pte. Crook, R.               202530  A    K. in A.         31/7/17
     Pte. Crook, P.                 4874  C    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Cross, W.                 3890  D    W.                1/8/16
                                                             and 9/9/16
     Pte. Crane, J.                 2829  B    W.                9/9/16
     Pte. Crossdale, A.              586  D    W.               28/5/16
     Pte. Cross, H.                 4854  B    W.                3/7/16
     Pte. Crabtree, J.                15  B    W.               31/7/16
                                               K. in A.         21/8/16
     2nd Lieut. Crone, J.            --   -    Shock            31/7/16
     Pte. Cross, T.                 1746  A    W.                3/8/16
    +Pte. Critchley, J.           202666  A    K. in A.         31/7/17
    +Pte. Cross, J.               202628  A    D. of W.          4/8/17
    +Pte. Crook, R.               202530  A    K. in A.         31/7/17
     Pte. Cross, E. S.            261166  C    W.               20/9/17
    +Pte. Croft, J.                36961  B    K. in A.         20/9/17
    +Pte. Crook, P.               201014  C    D. of W.        30/11/17
     Pte. Crane, J.                 2829  B    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Craven, E.                2872  B    W.               15/6/15
    +Sgt. Cross, E.                  735  A    K. in A.         15/6/15
     2nd Lieut. Craven, N. J.        --   -    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Cross, S.                26161  C    W.                3/9/18
     Pte. Crank, R. A.             30611  B    W.                4/9/18
     Pte. Crowther, R.             30691  -    W.                9/9/18
    +Pte. Crerar, J.               29092  C    K. in A.          9/9/18
     Pte. Croasdale, W.            28886  D    W.               30/9/18
     2nd Lieut Crossley, W. E.       --   -    W.              13/10/18
    +Pte. Crook, G.               201495  B    W.               16/8/18
                                               K. in A.        14/10/18
     Pte. Cryer, H.               202563  C    W.              24/10/18
    +Pte. Cross, T.               200384  A    Killed in
                                               Brussels         25/4/19
     Pte. Crossen, J.               1625  C    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Croft, J. A.            290282  A    W.               14/5/18
     Pte. Crossley, A.            201635  A    W.               23/5/18
     Pte. Crook, S.               203045  B    W.         N.T.  15/8/18
     Sgt. Crabtree, H.            243874  D    W.               16/8/16
     Lance-Sgt. Crougham, J.      201446  B    W.               25/3/18
                                                             and 9/4/18
     Pte. Croasdale, E.           200211  D    Missing    N.T.   9/4/18
     Lance-Cpl. Crompton, J.      265149  D    W.               13/4/18
    +Pte. Crossley, A.             28235  C    K. in A.          9/4/18
     Pte. Crossley, W.            204945  A    W.                9/4/18
    +Pte. Crowe, A. J.            205105  B    K. in A.         25/4/18
    +Pte. Crabtree, E.            243857  A    K. in A.         14/5/18
     Pte. Cumming, J.               4980  B    W.                9/9/16
     Pte. Cunliffe, J.             14318  D    W.                1/6/17
     Pte. Curwen, C.                4429  B    W.                2/8/16
     Pte. Curly, J.               243651  D    W.               31/7/17
     Pte. Curry, J.               202903  C    W.               31/7/17
                                                           and 18/11/17
     Pte. Cunningham, D.           16940  D    W.              30/10/17
    +Pte. Cuthbert, H.            202579  D    K. in A.        18/11/17
    +Pte. Culshaw, J. H.           28073  D    D. of W.        10/12/17
    +Pte. Curl, A. J.             242830  D    K. in A.         1/10/18
     Pte. Cunningham, W.            1615  C    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Cunliffe, S.             28243  A    W.               25/5/18
     Pte. Culshaw, J. H.            3284  A    W.         N.T.   9/4/18
     Pte. Curtis, T. S.            41632  B    W.               11/5/18
     Pte. Cutler, J.               23207  B    W.                9/5/18
     Sgt. Cyr, D.                    --   B    W.         N.T. 30/11/17
     Capt. Crump, J. A.              --   -    Shock            15/6/15


     Pte. Dainty, G.                1386  D    W.               15/6/15
     Sgt. Davenport, J. E.          1545  B    W.               26/5/15
     Pte. Darwen, J.                2956  B    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Davidson, C.              3896  D    W.         N.T.  28/6/16
     Pte. Daisy, T.                 7042  C    W.         N.T.   7/8/16
     Pte. Davies, W.                1905  A    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Davies, C.                3981  C    W.         N.T.   8/8/16
     Pte. Daley, J. B.              3927  C    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Dalton, A.                1726  C    W.                9/9/16
     Pte. Daggers, R.               1518  B    W.         N.T.   9/9/16
     Pte. Dale, W.                202507  B    W.                6/6/17
     Pte. Davies, G. A.            34317  A    W.                5/6/17
     Pte. Davies, H.              202567  D    W.               30/7/17
     Pte. Davenport, S. R.        235010  C    W.               31/7/17
     Pte. Dawson, R.              202483  B    W.               31/7/17
     Lance-Cpl. Davies, W. J.      34301  -    W.               31/7/17
     2nd Lieut. Dance, H.            --   -    W.               20/9/17
     Pte. Dandy, J.                18235  B    W.               29/9/19
     Pte. Davies, S.               24465  A    W.               20/9/17
     Pte. Davies, A. E.           290644  B    W.               20/9/17
     Pte. Davies, S.              202048  A    W.               20/9/17
     Pte. Daggers, G.             200210  C    W.               20/9/17
     Pte. Davies, W.               28248  B    W.              30/11/17
     Lance-Cpl. Davey F.          201380  B    W.                9/4/18
                                                                26/6/18
                                                           and 17/10/18
    +Pte. Davies, O.               39878  -    D. of W.         23/4/18
    +Pte. Davies, R.               24124  -    K. in A.         20/9/17
    +Pte. Davies, T.              202513  -    K. in A.         31/7/17
    +Pte. Davenport, S.            29105  A    K. in A.         20/5/18
     2nd Lieut. Dawson, J.           --   -    W.                2/6/18
     Pte. Davies, D. M.            41170  D    W.               18/8/18
     Pte. Dawson, R.              202483  B    W.                3/7/18
     Pte. Davenport, H. C.         37837  C    W.         N.T.  11/7/18
     2nd Lieut. Davies, H.           --   -    W.                5/9/18
     2nd Lieut. Daniels, H.          --   -    W.               11/9/18
     Pte. Davies, E.               41075  A    W.               14/9/18
     Cpl. Dandy, J.                18235  D    W.               27/9/18
     Pte. Davies, E. C.            28420  D    W.               30/9/19
     Pte. Davies, W.J.             34301  B    W.              14/10/18
     Pte. Dand, M.                 41634  D    W.               16/8/18
    +2nd Lieut. Davies, W. A.        --   -    K. in A.         15/6/15
     Sgt. Daggers, H.              16440  C    W.                9/4/18
     Pte. Davies, G.               29108  A    W.               14/5/18
     Pte. Davies, E. G.            29388  B    W.              14/10/18
    +Lieut. De Blaby, R.             --   -    D. of W.          8/8/16
    +Sgt. Devey, F.                 1592  B    K. in A.          9/8/16
     Pte. Dennison, R.              1058  C    W.               15/6/15
    +Pte. Dewhurst, J.              2554  A    K. in A.         16/5/15
     Pte. Dewhurst, F.              4567  B    W.               8/10/16
     Pte. Dewhurst, F.              6218  B    W.                9/9/16
     Pte. Dempsey, J.               6219  B    W.                9/9/16
    +Pte. Dempsey, J.             202838  B    K. in A.          7/6/17
     Pte. Dean, C. H.             201599  B    W.                6/5/17
     Pte. Delaney, J.             200050  B    W.               16/7/17
     Pte. Dewhurst, F.            202837  -    W.               31/7/17
     Pte. Dean, J. W.             242452  D    W.               20/9/17
    +Pte. Derbyshire, S.          203655  -    Died              6/4/17
    +Pte. Dewhurst, H.            203106  -    K. in A.          7/6/17
    +Pte. Dinwoodie, D.            28074  C    K. in A.        18/11/17
     Cpl. Dearden, W.             202449  A    W.         N.T. 30/11/17
    +Pte. Dench, G.               235009  B    D. of W.        17/12/17
     Pte. Demain, E. H. C.         28251  B    W.                9/4/18
     Sgt. Dean, J.                201694  D    W.         N.T.  13/4/18
    +Pte. Dexter, F. G.            41403  D    K. in A.         16/8/18
     Pte. Deardon, W.             202049  B    W.               16/8/18
     Lance-Cpl. Dewhurst, J.       25799  D    W.               13/7/17
     Cpl. Dewhurst, J.             25799  A    W.               12/4/18
     Lance-Cpl. Dickenson, A.       2567  B    K. in A.          3/8/16
     Pte. Dixon, R.                 2658  B    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Dixon, T.                 3982  D    W.               31/7/16
     Pte. Dixon, R.                 4541  D    W.                9/9/16
     Pte. Diggle, W.                3027  C    W.               26/9/16
     Pte. Dingsdale, T.           202605  B    W.               31/7/17
    +Lance-Cpl. Dickinson, D.     200626  -    D. of W.          7/4/17
     Pte. Dickenson, R. M.        202634  -    W.               31/7/17
     Pte. Dilworth, A.             22552  B    W.               20/9/17
     Pte. Digby, H. L.            282407  C    Missing    N.T. 18/11/17
    +Pte. Dixon, W.               376537  B    K. in A.         8/11/17
    +Pte. Dickenson, T.           290599  C    D. of W.         19/2/18
     Pte. Dickenson, T.            23741  D    W.               16/8/18
     2nd Lieut. Dixon, J. G. H.      --   -    W.               17/8/18
    +Pte. Downing, J.               2981  A    K. in A.         16/6/15
     Pte. Dowding, H.               4559  C    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Dobson, H. G.             4535  B    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Doble, E.               243237  B    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Dodgson, J.               2851  C    W.                9/9/16
     Capt. Donald, S. B.             --   -    W.                9/9/16
    +Pte. Doyne, W.                 6125  C    K. in A.          9/9/16
    +Pte. Dobson, S. B.           202122  A    K. in A.          8/8/16
    +Sgt. Donnelly, J.            202900  D    K. in A.         19/5/17
    +Cpl. Doran, J.               240607  -    K. in A.          7/3/18
    +Pte. Duncan, A. G.           235033  -    K. in A.         20/9/17
     Pte. Dodgson, J.             200773  A    W.                9/8/18
     Pte. Doult, H.               203334  B    W.                7/9/18
    +Pte. Donkin, A.               30999  C    K. in A.         24/9/18
     Pte. Dobson, G.               30961  B    W.              17/10/18
    +Pte. Draper, F.                6273  D    K. in A.          9/9/16
     Pte. Draper, G.               28148  A    W.              30/11/17
    +Pte. Drew, W.                204911  D    K. in A.         12/4/18
     Pte. Dring, A.               201683  D    W.               30/9/18
     Pte. Durham, R.                2618  A    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Duckworth, A.             3403  D    W.               12/7/15
    +Pte. Dunn, S.                   302  A    K. in A.         20/8/15
     Pte. Dugdale, W.               2922  B    W.               28/6/16
    +Pte. Dunderdale, E.          200546  B    K. in A.          8/8/16
     2nd Lieut. Ducksbury, O. H.     --   -    W., R.P. of W.    8/8/16
     Pte. Dudley, J.                3338  C    W.         N.T.   9/9/16
     Pte. Duerdon, J.               4673  A    W.         N.T.   9/9/16
    +Pte. Duckworth, H.             6276  D    K. in A.          9/9/16
     Pte. Duckworth, S.             6235  C    W.               26/9/16
     Pte. Duckworth, E.             6217  B    W.               26/6/16
     2nd Lieut. Duerden, W.          --   -    W.               26/9/16
     Pte. Duggan, J.                6175  A    W.               29/9/16
    +Pte. Duerden, T.               6176  A    K. in A.        23/12/16
     C.Q.M.S. Dudley, J.          200128  B    W.               24/5/17
     C.S.M. Dudley, J.            200128  A    R.P. of W.       31/7/17
    +Pte. Duckworth, A.           201111  D    D. of W.          8/6/16
    +Pte. Duggan, J.              202796  D    D. of W.          8/6/17
     Pte. Dunne, G.               255025  -    W.               31/1/17
     Pte. Dunn, J.                 28252  C    W.              18/11/17
     Pte. Dunnigan, J.            202423  B    W.               30/7/17
     Pte. Duckworth, H.            28249  D    W.               17/2/18
    +Pte. Duckworth, A.           243501  A    K. in A.         20/5/18
    +Cpl. Dutton, T.               30465  D    K. in A.          2/6/18
     Pte. Duxbury, B.             201781  B    W.                3/6/18
                                                            and 10/9/18
     Cpl. Durose, F.               39576  C    W.         N.T.  27/7/18
     Pte. Dunn, J.                 32285  D    W.               17/8/18
    +Pte. Duddle, T.               30330  B    K. in A.         2/10/18
    +Cpl. Duxbury, W. T.          202699  A    K. in A.         31/7/17
     Pte. Duckworth, A.           243501  A    W.              30/11/17
     Pte. Dyson, J.               202580  -    W.                5/6/18


     Pte. Eaves, J.                 1098  C    W.               15/6/18
     Pte. Eastham, J.               3912  D    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Eastham, T.               3118  B    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Eastham, R.               3139  C    W.                9/9/16
    +Pte. Eaves, T.               200698  B    K. in A.         31/7/17
    +Pte. Eaves, R.               200225  C    K. in A.         31/7/17
     Pte. Eastham, R.             200937  C    W.               31/7/17
    +Pte. Eastwood, J. A.          41637  A    K. in A.         14/5/18
     Pte. Easton, G. H.            28255  B    W.                3/7/18
    +Pte. Easthorpe, C. A.         35186  B    K. in A.        14/10/18
     Pte. Eales, J.                41638  D    W.                4/9/18
    +2nd Lieut. Eccles, W.           --   -    K. in A.         30/5/16
     Pte. Eckton, J.                2302  A    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Eckersley, A.           243224  A    W.                8/8/16
    +Pte. Eccles, F.                4546  B    K. in A.          9/9/16
    +Pte. Eckersley, J.             6170  D    W.              21/12/16
                                               K. in A.         10/1/17
     Pte. Eckersley, J. H.        202389  D    W.               31/7/17
     Pte. Eccles, T.              201288  A    W.               20/9/17
     Pte. Eccleston, I.           341506 (R.A.M.C.) W.    N.T. 30/11/17
     Pte. Ecceston, J.            201102  B    W.              30/11/17
     Pte. Eckersley, J.           202389  D    W.               10/4/18
                                                            and 16/8/18
     C.S.M. Edwards, T. J.           804  C    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Edwards, C.               1617  C    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Edwards, F. D.            4946  C    W.              23/12/16
     Pte. Edge, J.                202622  A    W.               31/7/17
     Cpl. Edgar, K. V.            201616  B    W.               31/7/17
     Pte. Edwards, F. D.          202107  A    W.              23/12/16
                                                           and 20/10/17
     Pte. Edge, F.                 28275  B    W.                9/4/18
     Pte. Edwards. J. W.          235496  B    W.                5/9/18
     Pte. Edwards, T.              14541  B    W.               30/9/18
    +Pte. Egan, J.                  4397  B    D. of W.         26/9/16
    +Pte. Egan, L.                242917  B    K. in A.         25/4/18
     Pte. Ellison, E.               2991  C    W.                5/8/16
     Pte. Elliott, R.               3508  B    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Ellis, F. C.             26574  -    W.               10/4/18
    +Pte. Ellemont, E. S.          28453  C    D. of W.         16/6/18
     Pte. Ellis, B.                96018  B    W.         N.T.   4/9/18
     Pte. Ellison, R.              30962  B    W.              17/10/18
     Pte. Elgar, H.               260108  B    W.              23/10/18
    +Pte. Ellerby, W.             243867  C    K. in A.         30/9/18
     Pte. Emmet, J.                 3954  B    W.         N.T.   9/9/16
     Pte. Entwistle, J.             3338  C    W.                9/9/16
     Sgt. Entwistle, T.           200025  A    W.                9/9/16
                                                            and 31/7/17
    +Pte. Enderby, W.             201642  C    K. in A.        18/11/17
     Pte. Entwistle, T.           244828  D    W.               11/9/18
     Pte. Entwistle, R.           243340  B    W.         N.T.  30/9/18
     Pte. Evans, A.                 2079  D    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Evans, A.                 4607  D    W.                8/8/16
     Lieut. Evans, A. J. D.          --   -    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Evans, C.               202051  C    W.                9/6/17
    +Sgt. Evans, R.               201790  C    K. in A.         31/7/17
     Pte. Evans, R.                36201  A    W.               31/7/17
     Pte. Evans, G. F.             29389  B    W.                3/6/18
     Pte. Evans, A.                 4879  C    W.                9/9/16
     2nd Lieut. Easterby, E. M.      --   -    W.               31/7/17
                                                           and 30/11/17


     Pte. Farmer, J.                 844  C    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Fairclough, C.            1063  C    W.               15/6/15
     2nd Lieut. Fairclough, E. L.    --   -    W.                8/8/16
    +Pte. Farrell, T.               2686  B    K. in A.         15/6/15
     Pte. Fallown, W.               1994  B    W.               28/6/16
    +Cpl. Farrell, W. A.          202030  -    K. in A.          8/8/16
    +2nd Lieut. Falby, E. F.         --   -    K. in A.          9/9/16
     Pte. Fazackerley, W.           3484  B    W.                9/9/16
    +Pte. Fairclough, W.            4420  B    K. in A.          9/9/16
     Lance-Cpl. Farnworth, H.     201697  C    W.               24/5/17
     Pte. Fairbrother, W.         203550  C    W.               31/7/17
    +Pte. Farrer, L.               19005  B    W.              18/11/17
                                               D. of W.         13/1/18
     Pte. Farrer, G.              202798  A    W.              30/11/17
     Cpl. Faraday, W.             202889  D    W.              30/11/17
     Pte. Faulkner, W.             38259  D    W.         N.T.  23/3/18
     Pte. Fazackerley, T.         201364  D    W.                9/4/18
     Lance-Cpl. Fazackerley, T.   201364  D    W.               15/8/18
     Pte. Farnell, D.              41643  A    W.               25/4/18
     Pte. Fairbrother, A.          20694  B    W.               30/4/18
     Pte. Farnworth, T.           240412  A    W.               14/5/18
     Pte. Faragher, W.             41642  D    W.                2/6/18
                                                            and 17/8/18
    +2nd Lieut. Fazackerley, H.      --   -    K. in A.         25/8/18
     Pte. Fayen, W.                32080  C    W.         N.T.  20/7/18
     Pte. Fenton, J.                2580  A    W.               15/6/15
     Lance-Cpl. Fenton, T.            24  B    W.                1/1/16
     Pte. Fearnley, E.            202654  D    W.               15/5/17
    +2nd Lieut. Fergie, A. B.        --   -    K. in A.         20/9/17
     Cpl. Fenton, T.              200012  B    W.               14/4/18
    +Pte. Folown, J.              200458  -    K. in A.         28/6/16
    +Pte. Ferrey, J.               41644  D    D. of W.        11/9/18;
                                                                12/9/18
     Pte. Fell, H.                 30613  D    W.               24/9/18
    +Pte. Fell, W.                265331  C    K. in A.         13/4/17
     Pte. Fielding, R.              3341  C    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Fishwick, W.               186  D    W.               14/9/15
     2nd Lieut. Firth, E. S.         --   -    W.                8/8/16
    +Pte. Finch, R. J.              2303  A    K. in A.         15/6/15
     Pte. Fishwick, H.              3555  D    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Finney, J.                4299  D    W.         N.T.   9/9/16
     Pte. Finch, F.               200098  D    W.               31/7/17
     Lieut. Fismer, G. J.            --  (R.A.M.C.) W.           2/8/17
     Pte. Finney, H.              235167  C    R.P. of W.       31/7/17
     Pte. Fisher, W.               13386  C    R.P. of W.      18/11/17
    +2nd Lieut. Firth, J. O.         --   -    K. in A.        18/11/17
     Pte. Finney, J.              202744  D    W.              30/11/17
     Pte. Fitzgerald, T.           37649  B    W.               10/4/18
    +Pte. Fielding, J. B.          41302  D    K. in A.         29/4/18
     Pte. Fiddler, J. N.           38985  C    W.                   811
     Pte. Fitzgerald, E.           81015  C    W.         N.T.   6/6/18
     Lance-Cpl. Fisher, W.         28454  B    W.               16/8/18
     Sgt. Fisher, W.               28454  B    W.               30/9/18
     Pte. Fiori, G.                40688  B    W.                4/9/18
    +Sgt. Fisher, J. Y.            22768  D    K. in A.        22/10/18
     Pte. Fitzgerald, A.           40185  A    W.              23/10/18
     Pte. Finney, F.               29275  A    W.                7/7/18
     Pte. Finch, T.                30645  C    W.                8/8/18
     Lance-Cpl. Fisher, E. E.      13881  C    W.                4/9/18
    +Cpl. Fletcher, J.              1987  B    K. in A.         10/4/16
     Lance-Cpl. Fletcher, J.        1755  D    W.               15/6/15
    +C.Q.M.S. Fletcher, J.          1755  D    K. in A.         31/7/17
     Pte. Flowers, T.                 84  A    W.               30/5/15
    +Pte. Fletcher, W.              2691  C    K. in A.         15/6/15
    +Pte. Forrest, J.              37598  -    K. in A.         15/6/15
     Pte. Flannery, L.              3165  C    W.               15/6/15
    +Pte. Fletcher, J.            200419  A    K. in A.         31/7/17
    +Pte. Flockhart, D.           202566  C    K. in A.         31/7/17
     Pte. Fletcher, U.             37668  B    W.               20/9/17
    +Pte. Fletcher, H.            290499  A    K. in A.         20/9/17
     Pte. Flanagan, L. E.          28264  B    W.               25/4/18
     Pte. Flaherty, T.             29117  D    W.               26/4/18
                                                            and 25/8/18
    +2nd Lieut. Fullerton, F.        --   -    K. in A.         31/7/17
     Pte. Fleming, J. W.           28075  A    W.                9/9/18
     Sgt. Fowler, E.                1349  D    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Fowler, E.                1374  D    W.               15/6/15
                                                             and 8/8/16
     Pte. Fowler, H.                 155  D    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Forrest, J. F.            3185  D    W.                5/9/15
    +Pte. Foster, E.                1445  D    D. of W.          5/8/16
    +Pte. Forshaw, R.               2574  B    K. in A.         15/6/15
    +Pte. Fowler, J.                2773  C    K. in A.         15/6/15
     2nd Lieut. Forshaw, C. H.       --   -    W.                9/9/16
    +2nd Lieut, Forrest, R.          --   -    K. in A.         27/9/16
     Pte. Forrest, J.             200968  D    W.                4/6/17
     Pte. Foreman, R.             200743  B    W.                7/6/17
    +Pte. Forsyth J.              201038  D    K. in A.         31/7/17
    +Sgt. Foley, W.               200097  D    W.               20/9/17
                                               D. of W.         23/9/17
     Pte. Forrest,                202839  B    R.P. of W.        9/4/18
     Pte. Fox, W. H.               28258  B    Missing           8/4/18
    +Pte. Ford, W.                235141  C    K. in A.   N.T.  13/4/17
    +Pte. Fowler, J.               31681  D    K. in A.         18/5/17
     Cpl. Foy, J.                 200058  B    W.                4/6/17
     Cpl. Foulkes, C.              18989  A    W.               26/5/18
     Pte. Foster, G.               28758  D    W.                3/6/18
     Sgt. Fryer, W.                 6074  D    W.         N.T.  28/6/16
     Rev. Forse, L. N.               --   -    R.P. of W.        9/4/18
    +Lance-Cpl. Frazer, A.          2690  A    K. in A.         15/6/15
     Pte. Freebury, A.              2875  C    Missing          15/6/15
     2nd Lieut. Francis, J. E.       --   -    W.               18/5/17
     Pte. Frame, A.               202584  D    W.         N.T. 18/11/17
     Pte. Frame, J.               203453  B    W.                9/4/18
     Pte. France, A.              202548  D    Missing          13/4/18
     2nd Lieut. Frost, L.            --   -    W.                2/5/18
     2nd Lieut. Fryer, T. H.         --   -    W.                2/5/18
     Lance-Cpl. Fryer, G.         200618  A    W.               27/5/18
     Pte. Francis, W. H.          244708  D    W.               22/8/18
     Pte. French, T. W.            28269  A    W.                9/9/18
     Pte. Frost, F. H.             35036  D    W.              22/10/18
     Pte. Francombe, W.            28268  B    W.               23/7/18
     Pte. Frodsham, J.             37681  D    W.               14/5/18
     Pte. Fyles, E.                  207  D    W.                3/8/16


    +Pte. Gardner, J.               1091  -    K. in A.         15/6/15
     Pte. Galloway, T.             36200  D    W.              20/11/17
    +Pte. Garlinge, C. J.           8912  B    K. in A.        23/11/17
     Pte. Gartshore, R.            30363  A    W.               28/3/18
     Pte. Garrett, F.              28274  B    R.P. of W.        9/4/18
     Pte. Gaskin, S.               28300  D    W.               29/4/18
    +Pte. Gale, A. G.              19000  D    K. in A.          8/6/18
     Pte. Gaunt, R.               282039  B    W.         N.T.  21/6/18
     Pte. Gardner, R.               2249  B    W.               28/9/16
     Pte. Gallagher, J.             1716  B    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Gaskell, J.               7406  B    W.                3/8/16
     Pte. Garside, R. C.            4881  A    W.                8/8/16
    +Pte. Geldeard, R.              2061  -    K. in A.         15/6/15
     Pte. German, A.               29411  A    W.               29/5/18
    +Pte. Gent, D. A.               1468  -    K. in A.         15/6/15
     Pte. Gent, F.                 36888  A    W.                2/6/18
     Pte. Gerber, C.               41303  B    W.                8/6/16
    +Pte. Gerrard, L.             201739  B    K. in A.         31/7/17
    +Pte. Gent, F.                  4849  B    K. in A.         28/6/16
    +Pte. Gerrish, J.              29282  D    K. in A.          3/9/18
     Lance-Sgt. German, G. H.      13393  D    W.                4/9/18
     Lance-Sgt. Gerrard, W.        38681  D    W.               13/4/18
     Lance-Sgt. George, T.         42040  B    K. in A.        14/10/18
    +Pte. Gill, H.                 28271  C    K. in A.        29/10/18
     Lance-Sgt. Giddens, H.       202772  D    W.              30/11/17
     Cpl. Gibson, J.               16200  B    W.                9/4/18
    +Pte. Gisby, S.                30368  C    K. in A.         10/4/18
     Pte. Gibson, D.              202800  B    W.               13/5/18
    +Pte. Gilbertson, R.           29127  A    K. in A.          8/7/18
    +Pte. Gidlow, A.                2246  A    K. in A.          9/9/16
     Pte. Gibson, T.              202773  D    W.                9/9/16
     Pte. Gillibrand, J.            4278  D    W.               29/5/16
                                                             and 9/9/16
     Pte. Gilmaur, W. H.            5284  B    W.               29/9/16
    +Pte. Ginger, F.               35972  A    K. in A.         31/7/17
    +Lance-Cpl. Gillett, N.          210  D    K. in A.         28/6/16
     Pte. Gillett, C.                330  B    W.               28/6/15
     Sgt. Gillett, T. E.             175  D    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Gill, G. A.                290  D    W.               15/6/15
    +Pte. Gillibrand,                152  -    K. in A.          3/5/15
     Pte. Gill, I.                  4686  A    W.                3/8/16
    +Pte. Gilbertson, R.           29127  A    K. in A.          8/7/18
    +Lance-Cpl. Gillabrand          2960  B    W.                9/9/16
                                               K. in A.         25/9/17
     Pte. Gillett, J.              25301  A    W.                9/6/17
    +Pte. Gidman, A.               29123  B    K. in A.          9/4/18
     Pte. Gledhill, W.            242322  C    W.               20/9/17
    +Lance-Cpl. Glover, T.           779  D    K. in A.         28/5/15
     Lance-Cpl. Gorton, F.        200756  D    W.              30/11/17
     Pte. Goddard, E.              27761  -    W.                9/4/18
     Pte. Gore, T. H.              23677  C    W.         N.T.   3/6/18
     Pte. Gore, T. W.              41088  D    W.                8/7/18
     Pte. Godfrey, R.               3289  D    W.                9/9/16
     Pte. Gorton, H. V.            12235  A    W.               18/5/17
    +Pte. Gordon, A.              202731  C    K. in A.         18/7/17
     Pte. Goodram, G.             238003  C    W.               21/7/17
                                                            and 20/9/17
     Pte. Gore, J. A.               2775  A    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Gorton, J.                 195  D    W.                5/9/15
    +Pte. Gorton, J.              202853  -    K. in A.         31/7/17
     Pte. Gough, R.                  105  B    W.               31/7/16
    +Pte. Gorst, T. H.              1944  A    K. in A.         15/6/15
    +Pte. Gorse, W.                 4433  A    K. in A.         30/7/16
     Pte. Goodier, L.              28270  D    W.                9/4/18
     Pte. Gough, G.                41647  A    W.               14/5/18
    +Pte. Goodram, W.              36729  B    K. in A.         1/10/18
     Pte. Gornall, E.              36877  B    R.P. of W.      23/10/18
     Pte. Goodier, R.             201280  B    Missing         23/10/18
    +Pte. Greenhalgh, J.           37290  B    K. in A.        18/11/17
     2nd Lieut. Green, A.            --   -    W.              30/11/17
     Pte. Griffiths, J.            37259  A    W.                9/4/18
     Cpl. Grant, W.                36559  C    W.         N.T.   9/4/18
     Pte. Graham, E.               29118  A    W.                9/4/18
     Pte. Gregson, J.              29124  -    W.                9/4/18
     Pte. Gray, J.                235011  A    R.P. of W.        9/4/18
    +Pte. Greenwood, H.           201568  D    K. in A.   N.T.   9/4/18
     Pte. Greenwood, R.            29409  D    W.               29/4/18
    +Pte. Gresty, O. F.            39617  B    K. in A.         28/4/18
     Pte. Grimshaw, H.             29410  C    W.               16/5/18
    +2nd Lieut. Greaves. F.          --   -    K. in A.          1/6/18
    +Pte. Grinter, W.              27177  D    K. in A.          2/6/18
     Pte. Grayson, W.              25592  B    W.               19/9/16
     2nd Lieut. Gray, W.             --   -    W.                9/9/16
     Pte. Green, F.                 2420  D    W.         N.T.   9/9/16
     Pte. Greenwood, G.             4650  D    W.         N.T.   9/9/16
     Pte. Gradwell, J.            200661  A    W.                6/5/17
     Pte. Greenwood, W. R.        202640  B    W.         N.T.  11/6/17
     Pte. Grey, W. H.             202642  B    W.               12/7/17
     Pte. Gregory, G.              26662  B    W.               31/7/17
     Pte. Grey, I. W.             235011  A    W.               31/7/17
    +Pte. Green, J.               244966  A    K. in A.         31/7/17
     Pte. Green, H.               200841  A    W.                2/8/17
     Pte. Gregson, E.             200412  A    W.               31/7/17
     Pte. Gregory, G.              26662  A    W.                2/8/17
    +Pte. Gregson, W.               2955  -    Died             25/7/15
     2nd Lieut. Gresdale, R.         --   -    W.               20/9/17
    +Lance-Cpl. Greenhalgh, G.    202475  C    K. in A.         20/9/17
     Pte. Grimshaw, A.             10721  D    W.               20/9/17
     Pte. Griffiths, J.             7259  A    W.         N.T.  20/9/17
     Pte. Grinse, T.               25503  C    W.               20/9/17
    +Pte. Gregson, H.             200715  C    Died             12/4/15
    +Capt. Gregson, E. M.            --   -    K. in A.         28/6/16
     Cpl. Green, J.                   56  B    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Grungy, T.                  70  A    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Greenwood, R.             1009  C    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Gregory, W.               1345  B    W.               15/6/15
     Cpl. Green, W.                 1593  B    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Gregson, G.               1943  A    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Greenwood, C.             3265  B    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Grime, J.                 3342  D    W.               15/6/15
                                                             and 8/8/16
     Pte. Greenwood, J.             2585  B    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Green, H.                 2990  A    W.               15/6/16
     Pte. Gregson, E.               1914  A    W.                1/8/16
    +Pte. Griffin, W.             200953  -    K. in A.         15/6/15
     Pte. Green, H.                 2990  A    W.                2/8/16
     Pte. Green, J.                 4996  C    W.                5/8/16
     Pte. Grimes, F.                3604  C    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Gregson, A.               3402  D    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Grime, T.                 7775  B    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Greenwood, C.             2265  B    W.               13/7/16
     Pte. Greenhalgh, J.          202953  C    W.                9/7/18
     Pte. Greenwood, J. W.         28275  B    W.                9/9/18
     Pte. Green, C.               240729  D    W.               15/8/18
     Pte. Green, C.                30614  D    W.               16/8/18
     Cpl. Graham, E.              200386  A    W.               31/7/17
    +Pte. Green, J.               244966  A    K. in A.          2/8/17
     Cpl. Grimshaw, T.             12924  D    W.                5/9/18
     Pte. Griffiths, T.            29412  A    W.                9/9/18
     2nd Lieut. Griffiths, H. W. C.  --   -    W.               1/10/18
     Pte. Graham, R.               41723  B    W.               30/9/18
     Pte. Gregory, H.             240549  B    W.              23/10/18
    +Pte. Grimshaw, J.              3375  -    K. in A.         15/6/15
    +Sgt. Gunn, A.                202498  B    K. in A.         21/4/18
     Pte. Gulloway, E.             28272  D    W.                4/9/18
     Pte. Gunn, F.                 38667  C    W.              17/10/18
     Pte. Guffogg, J.             241216  -    W.                9/4/18
     Pte. Gynes, W.               201404  D    W.                8/6/17


     Pte. Hankinson, W.            16150  B    W.                9/4/18
                                                             and 7/7/18
    +Pte. Haworth, W.              29140  C    K. in A.          9/4/18
     Pte. Harris, H. L.            26638  D    W.                9/4/18
     Pte. Hamer, T.               202062  B    W.              18/11/17
                                                                 9/4/18
                                                            and 17/8/18
     Pte. Harold, T. R.            28293  A    W.               10/4/18
    +Pte. Haslam, L.              203757  A    K. in A.          9/4/18
     Cpl. Hanley, T.              241169  -    W.                9/4/18
     Cpl. Hawkins, T. H.          245083  -    W.                9/4/18
     Cpl. Harvey, M.              241723  -    W.                9/4/18
    +Cpl. Haslam, H.              242279  A    Died            18/10/18
     Cpl. Haworth, D.              41654  D    W.                2/5/18
    +Cpl. Hampson. W.              29415  A    K. in A.         14/5/18
     Lance-Cpl. Hancox, W.        201562  A    W. & Missing     14/5/18
     Pte. Hampson, F.             202061  D    W.               14/5/18
     Lance-Cpl. Hankinson, J.     202166  A    W.               15/5/18
    +2nd Lieut. Hampson, J.          --   -    K. in A.         21/5/18
     Pte. Hacking, J.              23655  A    W.                1/6/18
     Cpl. Harwell, E. J.           33839  D    W.                3/6/18
     Pte. Hartley, H.             205006  B    W.               18/6/18
     Pte. Hayes, J.               202561  A    W.               20/6/18
     Pte. Hall, J.                 29729  D    W.               15/8/18
     Pte. Haighton, F.            413676  D    W.               15/8/18
     Pte. Hayes, F.               235500  D    W.               15/8/18
    +Pte. Hargreaves, F.          202803  A    K. in A.          9/9/16
    +Cpl. Hartley, A.               1135  A    K. in A.          9/9/16
     Pte. Hardy, J. R.              3799  A    W.                9/9/16
     Pte. Harrison, J.              5054  A    W.                9/9/16
     Pte. Hartley, J. W.            4678  D    W.         N.T.   9/9/16
     Pte. Haslam, R.              202059  D    W.                9/9/16
     Pte. Hacking, T.               4259  D    W.         N.T.   9/9/16
     Pte. Halley, H.                6105  D    W.                9/9/16
     Pte. Hankinson, J.             3175  B    W.                9/9/16
     Pte. Hamer, J.                 4802  B    W.                9/9/16
     Pte. Hargreaves, J. H.         4895  B    W.         N.T.   9/9/16
    +Pte. Harvey, A.                6301  C    K. in A.         25/9/16
     Pte. Hamer, J.                14592  B    W.         N.T.  26/9/16
     Pte. Harrison, J.            202564  A    W.                6/4/17
     Pte. Hargreaves, H.          202939  C    W.               24/6/17
     2nd Lieut. Hall, R. A.          --   -    W.                4/5/17
     Pte. Halliwell, W.           202725  D    W.               12/7/17
    +Pte. Harrison, T. C.         244645  A    K. in A.         21/7/17
     Lance-Cpl. Haworth, H.       238931  C    W.         N.T.  20/7/17
     Lance-Cpl. Haworth, J.        15384  C    W.               21/7/17
     Pte. Hardacre, J.            201796  C    W.               21/7/17
    +Capt. Harris, A. L.             --   -    K. in A.         31/7/17
     Sgt. Hall, A.                200587  C    W.               31/7/17
     Pte. Hall, C.                202627  D    W.               31/7/17
     Pte. Harrison, W.            201588  B    W.               31/7/17
     Pte. Hardman, T.             201349  -    W.               31/7/17
     Pte. Hargreaves, G.           36822  C    W.               31/7/17
    +Pte. Hatton, R.              202525  B    K. in A.         31/7/17
    +Pte. Haworth, J. H.          202610  B    K. in A.         31/7/17
    +Pte. Halsall, P.             202734  D    K. in A.         31/7/17
    +Sgt. Hurley, J.                 147  D    Died              8/8/16
     Pte. Hall                       138  D    W.                8/8/16
    +Cpl. Hall, H.                200604  D    K. in A.          8/8/16
     Pte. Harrison, W. A.           4055  D    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Hart, F.                  4885  C    W.                8/8/16
    +Sgt. Harling, W.                161  B    K. in A.         15/6/15
    +Pte. Harrison, P.              2198 (R.A.M.C.)K. in A. N.T. 8/8/16
     Pte. Hart, E.                  1404  D    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Hague, A. E.              2123  B    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Hayes, W.                 2279  B    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Hargreaves, P.            2677  A    W.               15/6/15
    +Pte. Hall, G. H.              28092  C    K. in A.        18/11/17
    +Pte. Hart, G. F.              28292  B    K. in A.        18/11/17
     Pte. Hannah, J.               28291  B    R.P. of W.      18/11/17
     Pte. Harvey, W.               28067  A    W.              20/11/17
    +Pte. Hardacre, J.            202140  A    D. of W.       30/11/17;
                                                                9/12/17
     Pte. Harrison, G. S.          28282  A    W.              30/11/17
     Pte. Hankinson, W.            16150  B    W.              30/11/17
     Pte. Hart, J.                201250  D    R.P. of W.      30/11/17
     Pte. Harrop, W.               16258  D    W.              30/11/17
     Pte. Hardman, F.              28289  D    W.              30/11/17
     Pte. Halliwell, W.           202725  D    W.              30/11/17
     Lance-Cpl. Halsall, W. H.    241351  C    W.                9/4/18
     Pte. Hampson, J. P.           28281  B    W.                9/4/18
     Pte. Haslam, L.               19372  B    W.                9/4/18
    +Pte. Hammond, L.             202979  B    K. in A.         31/7/17
     Pte. Hawkland, H.            202168  B    W.               31/7/17
     Pte. Hatch, W.                18600  B    Missing          31/7/17
     Pte. Hargreaves, A.           13411  D    Missing          31/7/17
     Pte. Hardman, E.             200280  D    W.               20/9/17
     Pte. Hamer, W.                37637  D    W.               20/9/17
     Pte. Hardman, W.              32015  D    W.               21/9/17
                                                            and 30/8/18
     Pte. Hackett, F.              14785  D    W.               20/9/17
     Pte. Hankinson, W.             6150  B    W.         N.T.  20/9/17
     Pte. Harrobin, W.            202989  C    W.         N.T. 18/11/17
     Pte. Haighton, J.            238017  C    W.               28/5/17
                                                           and 18/11/17
     Pte. Hartley, T.               3029  C    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Hayhurst, J. T.           1463  B    W.         N.T.   8/8/16
     C.S.M. Harwood, J.               81  D    W.                9/9/16
    +Cpl. Hawkhurst, C.             1618  C    K. in A.          9/9/16
     Cpl. Hartley, J.               1664  C    W.                9/9/16
     Pte. Halliwell, H.             3986  A    W.                9/9/16
     Sgt. Hall, A.                  2402  C    W.               13/9/16
    +Pte. Harrison, G.              1289  C    K. in A.          6/6/15
     Pte. Hall, T. V.               2083  D    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Harrison, W.              4195  A    W.                8/7/16
    +Pte. Hardacre, J.              5004  A    D. of W.        31/7/17;
                                                                9/12/17
     Pte. Hamer, H.                 8883  B    W.         N.T.  31/7/16
     Pte. Hamer, A.               200489  A    W.                2/8/16
     2nd Lieut. Hague, A. E.         --   -    Missing           5/8/16
     Pte. Harrison, F.              2964  C    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Hankinson, J.             3175  B    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Harrison, J.              2919  D    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Hartley, T.               3029  C    W.              21/10/15
     Pte. Hartley, H.               2558  B    W.              29/10/15
     Pte. Hargreaves, A.            3616  A    W.              29/10/15
     Pte. Hall, H.                   138  D    W.              30/10/15
     Pte. Hart, J.                   143  D    W.               26/4/16
     Pte. Hartley, H.               2558  B    W.               26/5/16
     Cpl. Harrison, F.              2964  C    W.               28/6/16
    +Pte. Haslam, G.                2538  B    K. in A.         14/6/15
    +Pte. Hayes, J.                 2771  A    K. in A.         15/6/15
    +Pte. Hardickey, M.             2842  B    W.               15/6/15
                                               Died             23/6/15
    +Pte. Haley, J. W.               253  -    D. of W.         11/9/16
    +Cpl. Hall, H.                200604  -    K. in A.          8/8/16
    +Pte. Hall, H.                200058  -    K. in A.          8/8/16
     Pte. Hartley, H.              20330  D    W.         N.T.  16/8/18
     Pte. Heyes, J. B.             30948  D    W.               11/9/18
     Pte. Hazeldine, J.           202760  D    W.               12/9/18
    +Pte. Horrobin, W.             29574  C    D. of W.         24/9/18
    +Lance-Cpl. Hawitt, W.         29413  -    K. in A.         30/9/18
     Pte. Hardacre, A. N.          30492  A    W.               30/9/18
     Pte. Hall, H.                 30678  B    R.P. of W.       2/10/18
     Pte. Hargreaves, G.           36822  C    W.              15/10/18
    +2nd Lieut. Halliwood, J.        --   -    K. in A.        17/10/18
     Pte. Hawkins, F.             260111  B    W.               7/10/18
     Pte. Haworth, J.             202651  D    W.         N.T. 22/10/18
     Pte. Hall, A. A. W.           41650  D    W.              22/10/18
     Pte. Harmer, W.               30966  B    R.P. of W.      23/10/18
     Pte. Hardman, W.              22628  A    W.              23/10/18
     Pte. Hadwin, W. B.           244863  A    W.              24/10/18
     Pte. Harrison, F.             29130  D    R.P. of W.      22/10/18
     Pte. Hamer, W.                28766  A    W.              29/10/18
     Pte. Hall, A. W. W.           41650  D    W.                8/6/18
     Pte. Hancox, J.               30497  A    W.               16/8/18
     Sgt. Hall, A.                  2402  C    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Hayes, A.               202659  A    W.               31/7/17
    +Pte. Hartley, J. F.           28062  B    K. in A.        30/11/17
    +Lance-Cpl. Hackett, T. K.    202528  A    K. in A.          9/4/18
     Lance-Cpl. Halton, A.          1709  -    R.P. of W.        8/8/16
     Pte. Hayes, J.               202561  A    W.               16/6/18
     Pte. Harvey, J. G.            30965  B    W.              14/10/18
    +Pte. Heap, E.                 28171  D    K. in A.          9/4/18
     Pte. Henthorrie, S.          240906  A    W.         N.T.  10/4/18
    +Pte. Heeney, W.               28276  -    K. in A.          9/4/18
    +Pte. Herd, J.                  9609  B    K. in A.         25/4/18
    +Pte. Hallows, E.             202656  -    K. in A.         31/7/17
    +Pte. Hanson, E.              202687  -    D. of W.         31/7/17
    +Pte. Hargreaves, J. H.         6222  -    D. of W.         3/10/16
    +Pte. Harrison, J.             16538  -    D. of W.          2/8/17
    +Lance-Cpl. Harwood, J.       200558  -    K. in A.         31/7/17
     Pte. Heaps, E.               240270  A    W.               14/5/18
     Pte. Heaps, J.               201465  A    W.                2/6/18
     Pte. Heywood, T.              30496  D    W.                2/6/18
    +Pte. Heath, E. W.             27487  B    K. in A.         16/8/18
     Pte. Heather, B.             235047  D    W.               16/8/18
     Pte. Heap, L. H.               3554  B    W.         N.T.   9/9/16
     Pte. Hesmondhalgh, H.          4143  B    W.                9/9/16
     Pte. Hewarth, W. A.            2319  A    W.               27/6/16
     Sgt. Heaney, C.                1704  D    W.               15/6/15
                                                             and 8/1/17
     Pte. Heuitt, F.              200146  C    W.                5/8/17
     Pte. Heaps, R.               202527  A    R.P. of W.       31/7/17
    +Cpl. Heaps, R.               200567  -    K. in A.         31/7/17
     Pte. Heald, D.                 3539  D    W.                8/8/16
     Lance-Cpl. Henderson, J. H. A. 2789  D    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Horn, W.                  3968  C    W.                9/9/16
                                                                22/9/17
                                                            and 7/10/18
     Pte. Heskith, H.               2606  C    W.                9/9/16
    +Pte. Hey, S.                 202856  C    K. in A.          9/9/16
     Pte. Heeley, J.                 253  C    W.               11/9/16
     Cpl. Heywood, E.                199  A    W.                9/9/10
    +Pte. Heaps, J.                 1788  B    K. in A.         15/6/15
    +Pte. Helm, F.                  2768  C    K. in A.         16/6/15
    +Pte. Hewitt, H.                2863  C    K. in A.         15/6/15
    +Pte. Helm, H.                  2927  B    K. in A.         16/6/15
     Pte. Hewitt, A. E.             2049  A    W.               31/7/16
     Pte. Helme, T.                  104  B    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Hesketh, J.               3287  D    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Hesketh, P.               2007  C    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Heaton, A. E.             2074  D    W.               31/7/16
     Pte. Hewitt, J.                4141  A    W.                8/8/16
    +Pte. Heyes, V.                 2743  C    K. in A.          1/7/16
     Sgt. Heaney, C.                1704  D    W.               15/6/15
    +Pte. Henderson, T. O.        202554  -    Died             20/2/17
    +Pte. Henley, W.                 289  -    K. in A.         15/6/15
    +Lance-Cpl. Hesketh, H.        22717  -    K. in A.         31/7/17
     Pte. Hewitt, A. E.             2049  A    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Hendy, W.               200488  D    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Heaton, C.               20294  B    W.         N.T. 18/11/17
    +Pte. Heaps, J.               200057  D    K. in A.        30/11/17
     Pte. Heywood, W. H.          290554  A    W.               20/9/17
     Pte. Heywood, J. W.          255501  D    W.               16/8/18
     Pte. Higginbotham, F.         30097  B    W.              14/10/18
     Pte. Heron, S. C.            244871  D    W.              22/10/18
     Pte. Helm, E.                 29128  B    R.P. of W.      23/10/18
     A.R.S.M. Heywood, H.         200222  D    W.              24/10/18
     Pte. Heald, A.               201313  A    W.                9/7/18
     Pte. Helme, J. E.             29137  D    W.                4/9/18
    +Pte. Heath, L.                40395  B    D. of W.          9/9/18
    +Capt. Hibbert, C. G. R.         --   -    Presumed Killed  15/6/15
    +Pte. Higgins, R               29132  B    K. in A.          9/4/18
     Sgt. Hindley, F.             240268  A    W.               25/4/18
     Pte. Higgins, L.               4787  B    W.         N.T.   9/4/18
    +Lance-Cpl. Higham, E.          2611  B    K. in A.          9/4/18
    +Pte. Hill, H.                 28288  -    K. in A.         11/3/18
    +Lance-Cpl. Higgins, J.       240083  B    K. in A.          8/7/18
     Pte. Hibbert, W.             241553  A    W.                7/7/18
     Pte. Hickson, T.              30491  A    W.                7/7/18
     Pte. Hilton, W.               28295  D    W.               16/8/18
    +Sgt. Hills, H. L.              3785  B    K. in A.   N.T.   9/9/16
    +Pte. Hitchon, H.               6223  B    D. of W.         9/9/16;
                                                                13/9/16
     2nd Lieut. Higson, F.           --   -    W.              13/11/16
     Pte. Higham, W.              200877  B    W.               31/7/17
     Pte. Hilton, J. R.            17102  -    W.               15/5/17
    +Pte. Highfield, J.           200457  B    D. of W.          7/6/17
     Pte. Higham, H.              201022  C    W.                9/7/17
     Pte. Hill, H.                 11513  A    W.               16/7/17
    +Pte. Hinsley, A.             202891  -    K. in A.          9/9/16
    +Pte. Hirst, E.                30493  -    D. of W.         30/5/18
    +Pte. Hodson, G. A.           238041  -    K. in A.          2/6/18
    +Pte. Holden, S.                4886  -    D. of W.         29/6/16
    +Pte. Horam, C.                 4382  -    Died             23/2/17
     Pte. Higham, A.              203728  A    W.               31/7/17
     Pte. Hilton, T.              242184  C    W.                5/8/16
     Pte. Higham, F.              202136  C    W.                9/9/16
     Pte. Highfield, J.             1993  B    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Higham, H.                3273  C    W.                5/8/16
     Lance-Cpl. Hill, J.             304  C    W.               15/6/15
    +Lance-Cpl. Hill, E.             780  C    D. of W.         25/8/16
    +Pte. Higgenson, E.             2936  B    K. in A.         14/6/15
     Pte. Hicks, F.                 1291  C    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Highfield, J.             1993  B    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Hindmarch, W. H.         28297  D    R.P. of W.      18/11/17
     Pte. Higham, J.              200451  A    W.              30/11/17
    +Lieut.-Colonel Hindle, R.       --   -    W.               15/6/15
                                               K. in A.        30/11/17
    +Lance-Cpl. Hill, J.          200186  A    D. of W.         21/9/17
     Pte. Hilton, R.                4378  B    W.               20/9/17
    +Pte. Higham, B.               21246  A    K. in A.        23/10/18
     Pte. Hicks, W. T.             30694  D    W.               16/8/18
     Pte. Hinsley, A.               6281  D    W.                9/9/16
    +Capt. Hibbert, C. G. R.         --   -    Presumed Killed  15/6/15
     Sgt. Hogg, J.                200092  C    W.         N.T.   9/4/18
     Cpl. Hodson, R.              201033  D    Missing           9/4/18
     Pte. Howard, C.              240240  A    W.                9/4/18
     Pte. Holden, W.               25383  A    W.         N.T.  14/5/18
     Pte. Hopwood, T.              30480  A    W.               14/5/18
     Pte. Holwill, R. H.           27963  D    W.               23/5/18
    +Pte. Howard, W.               36702  A    K. in A.         20/5/18
    +Lance-Cpl. Horribin, W.       29574  -    D. of W.         24/9/17
    +Pte. Hough, J. W.             23246  -    K. in A.         31/7/17
    +Pte. Howarth, H.               5247  -    K. in A.         27/8/16
    +Pte. Howarth, W. J.           29140  -    K. in A.          9/4/18
     Pte. Howson, L.              202057  D    W.               31/7/17
     Pte. Hobbs, W. A. E.          33840  C    W.               20/5/18
     Pte. Houghton, W. J.         238030  A    W.               29/5/15
     Pte. Hodson, J. A.            30495  D    Missing    N.T.   2/6/18
    +Pte. Holland, L.              28284  D    K. in A.          3/6/18
    +Pte. Holmes, J.              240065  B    K. in A.          5/6/18
     Pte. Holt, H.                201786  D    W.               25/6/18
     Pte. Howard, W.              238031  C    W.               27/6/18
     Pte. Hopwood, F.              30489  A    W.                7/7/18
     Pte. Hope, F.                243548  D    W.               16/8/18
    +Pte. Howarth, J. R.            6279  D    K. in A.          9/9/16
     Pte. Howson, R.                6101  D    W.                9/9/16
     Lance-Cpl. Holland, W.         1584  B    W.                9/9/16
    +Lance-Cpl. Hope, J. H.         4890  B    K. in A.          9/9/16
    +Lance-Sgt. Horsefield, T.      3396  C    K. in A.         30/6/16
     Lance-Cpl. Harwood, J.       200558  C    Missing          31/7/17
    +Pte. Hoilingworth, P.        235013  C    K. in A.         29/5/17
     Pte. Hopkins, E.               3283  B    W.         N.T.   3/5/17
     2nd Lieut. Holden, H. S.        --   -    R.P. of W.       31/7/17
     Pte. Hodgkiss, H.             31981  A    W.                9/6/17
    +Pte. Horner, A. E.           200646  A    K. in A.          9/7/17
     Pte. Holt, A.                202698  B    K. in A.         12/7/17
     Pte. Hodson, E.              203265  B    W.               13/7/17
    +Pte. Horsefield, R. A.        20280  A    K. in A.         21/7/17
     Pte. Homans, A.               36178  D    W.               31/7/17
     Pte. Hornby, W.              202060  B    W.               31/7/17
     Pte. Houghton, J.            200777  -    W.         N.T.  31/7/17
     Pte. Holden. W. A.            31834  A    W.               31/7/17
     Pte. Howarth, W. L.          202491  B    W.               31/7/17
    +Pte. Howlding, W.            203812  A    K. in A.         31/7/17
    +Pte. Hoyle, R.                 1681  A    K. in A.          8/8/16
     Cpl. Houghton, F.                54  B    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Hodgson, F.               1691  D    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Hodgson, J.               4427  D    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Hornby, E. R.             4454  C    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Hogg, J.                  4027  D    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Holcroft, G.              6430  B    W.                8/8/16
     2nd Lieut, Holden, J. A.        --   -    W. & R.P. of W.   8/8/16
    +Pte. Howe, W. D.               4635  A    W.                9/8/16
     Pte. Homer, A.                 2044  A    W.                9/9/16
     Lance-Cpl. Holland, W.         1584  B    W.                9/9/16
    +Pte. Holden, W.                3450  C    K. in A.          9/9/16
     Pte. Holgate, H.               4460  C    W.         N.T.   9/9/16
     Pte. Hodgson, J.               1418  D    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Hosker, T.                2962  B    W.                8/8/16
    +Pte. Hollinghurst, J.          1646  B    K. in A.         16/6/15
     Pte. Hodgkinson, D. R.         1789  B    W.               16/6/15
    +Pte. Hogg, J.                  2219  B    K. in A.         15/6/15
    +Pte. Howard, J.                2513  B    K. in A.         16/6/15
    +Pte. Howarth, J.               2597  B    K. in A.         16/6/15
    +Pte. Holker, J.                2753  B    K. in A.         16/6/15
    +Pte. Holt, W.                   300  C    K. in A.         16/6/15
    +Pte. Henley, W.                 289  D    K. in A.         16/6/15
     Pte. Hoggorth, M.              4888  C    W.               14/7/16
     Pte. Howson, L.                4887  A    W.               16/7/16
     Pte. Holt, T.                  4524  D    W.                3/8/16
     Pte. Holden, C.                  53  B    W.               29/5/15
     Pte. Hodgson, J.                204  D    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Howarth, F.               2093  D    W.               16/6/16
     Pte. Horsfield, T.             3396  D    W.               15/6/15
    +Pte. Houlding, J. C.             78  B    K. in A.         15/6/15
    +Pte. Holmes, T.                2843  B    K. in A.         6/11/15
    +Pte. Hoyle, R.                 1681  A    K. in A.          8/8/16
     Pte. Hood, D.                200253  D    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Hodson, W.                1567  D    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Holland, R.               1579  A    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Holland, W.               1584  B    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Hoyle, R.                 1681  A    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Hodgson, F.               1691  D    W.               15/6/15
     Lance-Cpl. Holden, R.          1740  B    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Howarth, R.               2653  C    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Hodson, E.                2825  B    W.               15/6/15
     2nd Lieut. Houghton, A. T.      --   -    W.               13/6/15
     Capt. Houghton, A. T.           --   -    W.              30/11/17
     Pte. Houghton, W. H.         202435  B    R.P. of W.      18/11/17
    +Pte. Houghton, A. F.          28285  B    K. in A.        18/11/17
     2nd Lieut. Hornby, R.           --   -    W.              18/11/17
     Pte. Holland, H.              13644  B    W.              30/11/17
    +Pte. Horarth, W.              36077  D    K. in A.        30/11/17
     Pte. Holland, W. H.           28286  D    W.                9/4/18
     2nd Lieut. Horsfall, R. E.      --   -    W.                9/4/18
     2nd Lieut. Howarth, J.          --   -    W.                9/4/18
     2nd Lieut. Homer, G. S.         --   -    W.                9/4/18
     Pte. Hopkins, E.              32183  B    Missing          31/7/17
     Pte. Holgate, H.             200288  D    Missing          31/7/17
     Pte. Holland, H.              17484  D    W.         N.T.  18/9/17
     Pte. Holden, G. B.            37656  D    W.               20/9/17
     Pte. Holland, H.              13644  B    W.               20/9/17
    +2nd Lieut. Holden, H.           --   -    K. in A.         21/9/17
    +2nd Lieut. Holmes, C.           --   -    D. of W.         20/9/17
     Lance-Cpl. Hough, R.         202930  B    W.               20/9/17
     Lance-Cpl. Hoggett, A.       201272  B    W.               20/9/17
    +Pte. Hodson, R.               36086  D    K. in A.         20/9/17
     Pte. Horan, J.               201740  D    W.               20/9/17
    +Pte. Howarth, A.              32059  A    K. in A.         20/9/17
    +Pte. Howarth, T.             202804  A    K. in A.         20/9/17
     Pte. Holt, A.                202647  D    W.              30/10/17
     Lance-Sgt. Holt, A.          202647  D    W.               18/5/18
     Sgt. Holt. A                 202647  D    W.              15/10/18
     Pte. Holmes, T.               30620  D    W.                4/9/18
     Cpl. Hoole, R.               202982  C    W.               10/9/18
     Pte. Horrocks, J.            201986  B    W.               14/9/18
     Pte. Howard, T.               28296  B    W.               23/9/18
     2nd Lieut. Howarth, G.          --   -    W.               1/10/18
    +Pte. Honey, C.                36017  -    K. in A.         1/10/18
     Pte. Holt, H.                 20176  D    W.         N.T.  30/9/18
     Pte. Horsley, J.              30964  B    W.              14/10/18
     Pte. Howarth, R.              33924  D    W.              22/10/18
     2nd Lieut. Howarth, L.          --   -    W.               31/7/17
    +Pte. Hockey, F.              202626  D    K. in A.        17/10/18
     Pte. Hoodless, L.             28277  A    W.              30/11/17
     Lance-Cpl. Hough, R.         202430  B    W.         N.T. 30/11/17
     Sgt. Hogg, J.                200092  C    W.         N.T.   9/4/18
     Pte. Hodgson, H. O.          240348  B    W.               13/5/18
    +Cpl. Hutchinson, J.          240067  D    K. in A.          9/4/18
     Pte. Hughes, F.               28280  D    W.                9/4/18
    +Cpl. Hunt, G. N.             202608  A    K. in A.         10/4/18
    +Pte. Hutchinson, T.           28299  B    K. in A.          9/4/18
     Cpl. Huddart, W. P.          290794  A    W.               11/4/18
     Pte. Hunt, J. W.             235026  A    R.P. of W.        9/4/18
    +Pte. Hubbard, H.              39396  D    D. of W.         2/5/18;
                                                                 5/5/18
    +Pte. Hunt, W.                 29414  C    K. in A.         10/5/18
     Lance-Cpl. Hutchinson. J.    202553  A    W.               14/5/18
     Pte. Hulme, W. E.            240092  A    W.               14/5/18
     Pte. Hurst, C.                34173  A    W.         N.T.  30/5/18
     Pte. Hutchinson, W.            4465  B    W.                9/9/16
     Pte. Hubbersty, T.             4575  B    W.                9/9/16
     Pte. Hudson, G.                6241  C    W.               25/9/16
     Cpl. Hubbersty, J.           200544  A    W.               21/7/17
     Pte. Humphries, H.             4891  C    W.                9/9/16
     Pte. Hunter, J.                 171  D    W.               15/6/15
     Cpl. Hunter, J.                 171  D    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Hudson, E.                1963  B    W.                8/8/16
    +Pte. Hutton, A. H.             1083  C    K. in A.         16/5/15
     Cpl. Hall, H.                  2522  D    W.               14/7/16
     Pte. Hurley, J.               20054  D    W.                2/8/16
     Pte. Hudson, J.                 234  C    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Hall, H.                  3983  D    W.                1/4/16
     Pte. Hurley, J.                2084  D    W.                2/8/16
     2nd Lieut. Hunt, J.             --   -    W.                3/8/16
    +Pte. Hunt, R.                  2300  A    K. in A.          4/6/15
    +Pte. Hunt, D.                  4273  -    K. in A.         29/5/16
     Pte. Hubbersty, J.             2241  B    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Hughes, J. G.            28287  C    R.P. of W.      18/11/17
     Pte. Hulme, S.               202500  B    W.              30/11/17
    +Pte. Humphries, H.             4891  C    W.               31/7/17
                                               D. of W.         28/9/17
     Pte. Hulme, W.               235134  D    W.         N.T.  20/9/17
     Pte. Hunter, T. D. J. L.     244867  A    W.         N.T.  20/9/17
    +Pte. Huddleston, E.          290729  C    K. in A.         20/9/17
     Pte. Hurst, O. H.            243111  D    W.               16/8/18
     Pte. Hubbick, A.              26691  C    W.               1/10/18
    +Pte. Hudson, F.               34112  D    K. in A.        22/10/18
     Pte. Hull, F.                240113  B    R.P. of W.      23/10/18
    +Pte. Harrison, J.             16538  -    D. of W.          2/8/17
    +Pte. Hunter, W.              201472  -    K. in A.         22/4/17
    +Sgt. Hurley, J.              200063  -    K. in A.          8/8/16


    +Pte. Ianson, R.              201678  D    K. in A.         31/7/17
     Pte. Ibbotson, J.            235162  -    W.         N.T.   5/7/17
    +2nd Lieut. Ibbotson, G. S.      --   -    K. in A.         14/5/18
     Pte. Ikin, J.                 25270  C    W.                3/6/18
    +Dr. Inglis, W.                 1555  B    K. in A.         15/6/15
     Pte. Ince, R.                   132  D    W.               15/6/15
    +Pte. Ingram, J.                3275  C    K. in A.          8/8/16
    +Lance-Cpl. Ingle, H.         202762  C    K. in A.          9/9/16
     Sgt. Innes, A.               202937  B    W.               31/7/17
     Pte. Ince, W.                203633  D    W.         N.T.   9/4/18
     Pte. Ince, J.                  3895  D    W.                4/8/16
     Pte. Ince, J.                 39955  D    W.               16/8/18
    +Pte. Irving, G.                 219  D    K. in A.         15/6/15
     Pte. Irving, A.                4573  D    W.                8/8/16
     Lance-Cpl. Isherwood, J.       6263  D    W.                9/9/16
     Sgt. Isles, R.                  993  C    W.               15/6/15
    +C.S.M. Isles, R.             200195  C    K. in A.         21/7/17
     Pte. Isherwood, A.           202858  C    W.              30/11/17
    +Pte. Isherwood, R.           290916  B    K. in A.         25/4/18


    +Pte. Jackson, S.               1622  B    K. in A.         15/6/15
    +Pte. Jackman, J.                217  B    K. in A.         15/6/15
     Pte. Jackson, T.               1464  D    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Jackson, W.               1694  A    W.               15/6/15
    +Lance-Cpl. Jameson, A.         1069  C    K. in A.         16/6/15
    +Pte. Jackson, J.               3419  B    K. in A.          8/8/16
     Pte. Jackson, W.               6226  B    W.                9/9/16
     Pte. Jackson, J.             202582  B    W.               12/7/17
     Pte. Jackson, W.               3183  D    W.         N.T.  21/7/17
     Pte. James, W. J.            202147  -    W.               31/7/17
    +Pte. Jagger, A.              202449  B    K. in A.         31/7/17
    +Cpl. Jackson, W.             202651  C    K. in A.         31/7/17
    +Cpl. Jackson, H.             202701  C    K. in A.         31/7/17
     Pte. Jackson, J. J.            2713  B    R.P. of W.        9/4/18
     Pte. Jamieson, H.             28076  D    W.               25/4/18
     Pte. Jackson, R. S.           41534  D    W.               14/5/18
    +Cpl. Jackson, W.              27792  C    K. in A.          8/6/18
    +Pte. Jackson, J.              41738  B    K. in A.         22/6/18
    +Pte. Jackson                  30696  -    K. in A.         11/8/18
     Pte. James, L. M.             42001  A    W.               16/8/18
     Pte. Johnson, L.              30920  D    W.                4/9/18
     Pte. Jackson, H.              30919  D    W.                4/9/18
     Pte. Jones, A.               214364  C    W.         N.T.   3/9/18
     Pte. Jacobs, M.              245144  C    W.                3/9/18
     Pte. Jameson, T.              30967  B    W.               30/9/18
     Pte. Jackson, W.               3183  D    W.               28/2/18
     2nd Lieut. Jenkinson, T. C.     --   -    W.               31/7/17
     Sgt. Jeffries, W.             34300  A    W.               14/5/18
     Pte. Jeffrey, E. H.            5280  B    W.         N.T.  14/5/18
    +Pte. Johnson, R. L.            2406  B    K. in A.         15/6/15
     2nd Lieut. James-Alfred         --   -    W.               26/2/18
     Lieut. Jenkins, W. H.           -- Medical W.               9/4/18
                                        Officer
     Pte. Jolly, J.                 1035  A    W.               15/6/15
                                                             and 8/1/17
     Pte. Jones, E. J.              1288  C    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Jolly, J.                 1969  B    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Joyce, V.                 2547  B    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Jones, M.                  107  B    W.               15/6/15
    +Lance-Cpl. Johnson, W.         2264  A    K. in A.          1/8/16
     Pte. Johnson, W.               3568  B    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Jones, J.                 4189  A    W.                9/9/16
     Pte. Jordan, J.                5342  C    W.              14/11/16
    +Pte. Johnston, W.            202583  B    K. in A.          2/6/17
     Pte. Jones, W.               202509  B    W.                2/6/17
     2nd Lieut. Johnston, W. H.      --   -    W.                4/6/17
     Pte. Jordan, J.              202391  C    W.               18/7/17
     Pte. Jones, J. O.            205561  B    W.         N.T.  31/7/17
     Pte. Jones, W.               202509  B    W.               31/7/17
     Pte. Johnson, J.              23253  A    W.               31/7/17
                                                           and 30/11/17
     Pte. Jones, C.               290797  A    W.               20/9/17
     Pte. Jolly, J.               201003  D    W.               20/9/17
     Pte. Johnson, F.              37575  B    W.               20/9/17
    +Pte. Jones, W.                19744  B    K. in A.         20/9/17
     Pte. Jones, G. H.             27571  B    W.               20/9/17
     Lance-Cpl. Johnson, J. E.    203780  C    W.         N.T. 18/11/17
     Pte. Jones, P.                36191  A    W.              30/11/17
    +Pte. Johnson, J.              23253  A    K. in A.        30/11/17
     Pte. Jones, J.               202581  C    W.              30/11/17
     Lance-Cpl. Jones, W. E.       29057  A    K. in A.         28/2/18
    +Pte. Jones, T. E.             34304  B    K. in A.          9/4/18
     Pte. Jones, A.                36191  A    W.               14/5/18
     Pte. John, D. T.              41200  D    W.                3/6/18
     Pte. Jones, C. M.             30649  C    W.               28/7/18
     Pte. Jones, H.                29417  C    W.                4/9/18
     2nd Lieut. Jones, H.            --   -    W.               11/9/18
     Lance-Cpl. Jones, F.           6765  D    W.         N.T.  30/9/18
     Pte. Jones, J.                30655  A    Missing         13/10/18
     Pte. Jones, A.               242875  D    W.              16/10/18
    +Cpl. Johnson, H. C.           30329  B    K. in A.        22/10/18
     Lance-Cpl. Jones, F.           6756  D    W.         N.T.   1/6/18
     Pte. Jump, J.                202975  -    W.               18/7/17
     Pte. Jump, R. W.              36848  C    W.               31/7/17


     Pte. Kay, C.                   2221  D    W.               15/6/15
    +Pte. Kay, E.                   3040  C    K. in A.         15/6/15
     Pte. Kay, F.                   4916  D    Missing           8/8/16
     Pte. Kay, G.                 202064  A    W.                9/9/16
                                                            and 18/7/17
    +Pte. Kay, G.                   8311  B    K. in A.   N.T.  20/9/17
     Pte. Kay, J.                  37664  B    W.               20/9/17
    +Lance-Cpl. Kay, J.           240325  C    K. in A.         14/5/15
    +Pte. Kellett, W.               3438  A    W.               15/6/15
                                               Died             30/6/16
     Pte. Kellett, W.               1476  D    W.         N.T.  15/6/15
     Pte. Kempster, J.              1297  C    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Kellett, F.               2808  A    W.               15/6/15
    +Lance-Cpl. Kerfoot, J.         1201  D    K. in A.         15/6/15
    +Pte. Kell, T. W.               2659  C    K. in A.         15/6/15
     Pte. Kelly, J.                 2040  B    W.                2/8/16
     Pte. Kelly, P.                 5356  D    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Kellett, A. J.            3929  D    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Kent, G.                   233  C    W.                9/9/16
     Pte. Kelly, W.                 4897  D    W.                9/9/16
     Pte. Kenyon, F.                6116  D    W.                9/9/16
    +Pte. Kenyon, T. W.           202972  -    K. in A.         31/7/17
     Lance-Cpl. Kellgariff, J.      2068  D    W.                9/9/16
     Pte. Kenyon, W. R.             6185  A    W.               29/9/16
     Pte. Kershaw, W.               4619  D    W.         N.T.  29/9/16
     Pte. Kenyon, F. H.            36192  C    W.                9/6/17
     Sgt. Kelly, A.               202202  D    W.                9/6/17
     Pte. Kellaway, A. A.          26185  A    W.               31/7/17
     Pte. Kershaw, W.             202893  D    W.               20/9/17
     Pte. Kelton, A. G.           244920  B    W.                7/7/17
                                          A    W.              30/11/17
     Pte. Kershaw, F.             202788  D    W.              30/11/17
     Sgt. Kelly, A.               202702  D    W.                9/4/18
     Lance-Cpl. Kent, A. E.        29144  A    W.               10/4/18
     Pte. Kelsall, A.             202661  A    W.               10/4/18
     Pte. Kennedy, N.              29391  B    W.               25/4/18
     Pte. Kettley, C.              18841  A    W.                2/6/18
     Pte. Kerridge, A. D.          29390  C    W.               16/8/18
     Pte. Kerfoot, W.              37248  D    W.               17/8/18
     Sgt. Kelly, W.               202702  D    W.               16/8/18
     Pte. Kendrick, C. G.          30992  B    W.               23/9/18
     Cpl. Keith, D.                30460  A    W.               26/5/18
     2nd Lieut. Kershaw, E.          --   -    W.                3/9/18
     Cpl. Kent, G.                200113  B    W.               27/7/19
     Pte. Killgarriffe, J.          2068  D    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Kirkham, M.               3089  A    W.               15/6/15
    +Pte. Kirby, R.                 3962  D    K. in A.          3/8/16
     Pte. Kippax, J.                4949  C    W.                8/8/16
     Lance-Cpl. Killgarriffe, E.    2007  D    W.         N.T.   8/9/16
    +Pte. Kirk, J.                202859  C    K. in A.          9/9/16
    +Pte. Kippax, J.              202108  B    W.                9/9/16
                                               K. in A.          4/6/17
    +Lance-Cpl. Kippax, R.        202108  C    W.                4/6/17
                                               D. of W.          5/6/17
     Pte. Kilby, I.                16878  C    W.               31/7/17
     Pte. King, T.                200534  A    W.               31/7/17
     Pte. Kilshaw, W.              32037  A    W.               31/7/17
     Pte. Kilby, W.               203063  D    W.         N.T.  20/9/17
     Cpl. Kirkham, A.             200559  A    W.               13/4/18
     Pte. Kirkman, J.             242976  A    W.               22/8/18
     Pte. Killick, E. V.           42004  D    W.               30/9/18
     Pte. King, C.                 30946  D    W.               30/9/18
     Pte. Kirkham, C.              30681  A    W.              20/10/18
     Pte. Kimberley, A.            32092  A    W.                8/7/18
     Lieut. King, E.                 --   -    W.                3/9/18
     Pte. Kirkman, J. W.            2274  C    W.                8/8/17
    +Pte. Kirkman, J. W.            7721  D    K. in A.          8/8/16
     Pte. King, T.                  2213  A    W.                8/9/16
     Pte. Kirkham, A.             200599  A    W.               31/7/17
     Pte. King, J. A.             205083  B    Missing          23/4/18
     2nd Lieut. Kirkby, G.           --   -    W.               25/9/18
    +Pte. Knott, A.               202757  C    K. in A.          9/9/16
    +Pte. Knight, J.              203594  A    K. in A.         31/7/17
     Pte. Knox, A.                  5632  A    W.              30/11/17
    +Sgt. Knowles, R.             200895  A    K. in A.          9/4/18
     Pte. Knapper, J.              30622  C    W.               16/8/18
     Pte. Knight, W.              235502  B    W.               30/9/18
     Pte. Knight, C.               20599  B    W.              14/10/18
    +Pte. Knowles, A.             201454  A    K. in A.         31/7/17
     Pte. Knight, W.              235502  B    W.              23/10/18
    +Pte. Knowles, F. G.           35176  -    K. in A.         31/7/17


    +Pte. Large, H.               265663  -    Died              9/7/17
     Pte. Lapping, G.              28090  C    W.              18/11/17
     Pte. Lawrenson, J.            37682  D    W.              20/11/17
    +Pte. Lawrenson, W.           201213  A    K. in A.        30/11/17
    +Pte. Lawson, F.               27232  B    K. in A.        30/11/17
     Pte. Latimer, E. M.          244818  D    W.               16/8/18
     Pte. Lawson, T. S.            51638  C    W.         N.T.  25/9/18
     Pte. Laithwaits, W.            6106  D    W.                9/9/16
     Pte. Lawson, M.                4061  B    W.         N.T.   9/9/16
     Pte. Lawson, T.                4091  B    W.                9/9/16
     Pte. Larmour, T.             201760  B    W.               31/7/16
     Pte. Larkin, F.                1348  D    W.               26/6/15
     Cpl. Lancaster, J.             1984  B    W.               15/6/15
     Sgt. Lancaster, J.             1984  B    W.                1/8/16
     Pte. Lambert, S.               2588  B    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Larmour, J.                231  B    W.               28/7/16
     Lance-Cpl. Latham, E.          2553  B    W.                3/8/16
     Pte. Larkin, C.                4865  D    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Latham, T.                4301  D    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Lambert, H.               4369  B    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Latimer, J.               3389  C    W.                9/9/16
     Pte. Landston, F.             19232  D    W.               30/9/18
     Pte. Lake, R. C.             260129  C    W.               28/6/18
     Pte. Law, A.                   3252  C    W.                8/8/16
    +Pte. Latham, C. W.            30624  B    K. in A.         1/10/18
     Pte. Leyland, P.              37254  B    W.               20/9/17
     Pte. Lees, R. E.             290875  C    R.P. of W.      18/11/17
     Pte. Lewis, P.               202749  C    Missing         18/11/17
    +Pte. Leach, H. J.             27967  A    K. in A.        30/11/17
     Pte. Lennon, J.              243771  D    W.               11/4/18
    +Pte. Leary, A.                17549  -    K. in A.          9/4/18
    +Pte. Lewtas, J.                4900  -    K. in A.         29/9/16
     Pte. Lee, J. T.               30969  B    W.               30/9/18
     Pte. Lewis, W. T.             30625  D    R.P. of W.       30/9/18
     Pte. Levitt, F. J.            35647  D    W.               15/8/18
     Pte. Leach, F.                 2401  B    W.                9/9/16
     Pte. Linness, E.              41669  C    W.                2/5/18
    +Sgt. Lightbowne, J.           24061  B    K. in A.        18/11/17
    +2nd Lieut. Livesey, J. A.       --   -    K. in A.        30/11/17
     Pte. Lilburn, W. J.           33725  B    W.                9/4/18
     Pte. Lipman, S.               29152  C    W.                9/4/18
    +Pte. Lightfoot, H.            29154  C    K. in A.         23/9/18
     Pte. Lingard, S.               4500  C    W.         N.T.   9/9/16
     Pte. Livingstone, J.            245  D    W.                9/9/16
     Pte. Livesey, R.             202968  C    W.               14/4/17
     Pte. Lightfoot, W. B.         36194  B    R.P. of W.       31/7/17
     Pte. Livesey, J.               5439  C    W.               20/9/17
     Pte. Liddell, W.             243541  A    W.               20/9/17
    +Pte. Livesey, J.             202938  B    K. in A.         20/9/17
     Pte. Lister, F.                2805  A    W.               15/6/15
     Lance-Cpl. Lister, A.          1385  D    W.               31/8/15
    +Capt. Lindsay, H.               --   -    K. in A.          8/8/16
     Pte. Liptrot, J.             202421  D    W.                9/4/18
     Pte. Lloyd, F.               202973  B    W.               14/6/18
    +Pte. Lloyd, L.                18335  -    K. in A.          9/4/18
     Pte. Lloyd, J. G.             41216  D    W.                4/9/18
     Pte. Lloyd, W. S.            203832  A    W.              23/10/18
    +Pte. Longworth, W.            17838  B    K. in A.        30/11/17
     Sgt. Lowe, A.                240239  B    W.                9/4/18
     Capt. Lonsdale, H.              --   -    W.                1/8/18
     Pte. Loud, J.                 13866  C    W.               16/5/18
     Pte. Lomas, S. W.             29392  B    W.                4/9/18
     Pte. Loud, A.                204976  C    W.                5/9/18
    +Pte. Lowe, B.                235049  -    K. in A.         31/7/17
     Pte. Lofthouse, J.             2318  A    W.               15/6/15
    +Cpl. Lofthouse, J.           200583  A    K. in A.         29/5/17
    +Pte. Lord, T. E.             203014  C    K. in A.          1/6/17
    +Cpl. Lomax, J.                  --  (R.A.M.C.) K. in A.    31/7/17
     Pte. Lowe, W.                203599  A    W.               31/7/17
     Pte. Loftus, J.                4356  C    W.                9/9/16
     Pte. Lowe, J. H.              30623  D    W.               30/9/18
     Pte. Legan, S.                27552  C    R.P. of W.      22/10/18
    +Pte. Lowndes, T.             201532  B    K. in A.         31/7/17
     Pte. Lowe, H.                 30925  D    W.              22/10/18
     Pte. Lund, J.                200688  C    W.                9/4/18
    +Pte. Lupton, S.              201788  C    K. in A.          9/4/18
    +Sgt. Lucas, E.               201091  A    Died while        9/4/18
                                               P. of W.
    +Pte. Lund, J.                  2693  C    Missing           9/9/16
     Pte. Lund, H.                  4373  D    W.                9/9/16
    +Pte. Lewtas, J.                4900  B    K. in A.         29/9/16
     Pte. Lund, J.                   285  C    W.               15/6/15
    +Pte. Lucas, W.                 2051  D    K. in A.         16/6/15
     Pte. Lupton, W.                4090  B    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Lund, J.                  4333  B    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Lucas, E.                 3374  D    W.                9/9/16
    +Pte. Lyons, C.                29060  C    K. in A.          9/4/18
     Lance-Cpl. Lythgoe, R.        18346  D    W.                7/6/17
     Pte. Lythgoe, S.               1611  C    W.               27/6/15
     Pte. Lyon, G. E.               2281  C    W.               15/6/15
    +Pte. Lynch, H.                 2236  A    K. in A.         16/6/15
    +Pte. Leitch, D. C.            36041  A    K. in A.         14/5/18
     Pte. Lee, B.                  27603  A    W.         N.T.  14/5/18
     Pte. Lewis, W. P.             30690  C    W.                9/9/18
     Lance-Cpl. Leigh, W.          13306  B    W.               30/9/18
     Pte. Lewis, C.                 4286  C    Missing    N.T.   9/9/16
     Pte. Lees, C. J.               3132  C    W.                9/9/16
     Lance-Cpl. Lewty, F.           3259  D    W.                9/9/16
     Pte. Lee, G.                   4939  B    W.                9/9/16
     Pte. Lever, E.                 4186  A    W.               28/9/16
     Pte. Leighton, E.              6187  A    W.               29/9/16
    +Pte. Leonard, J.               4606  A    W.              23/12/16
                                               D. of W.        30/12/16
     Pte. Lewis, J.               202065  -    W.               15/4/17
                                                            and 31/7/17
     Pte. Lee, H.                 202437  B    W.         M.    31/7/17
     Pte. Levingstone, R.         202066  C    W.               31/7/17
    +Pte. Leach, F.               202806  A    K. in A.         31/7/16
     Lance-Cpl. Leeming, W.       260428  A    W.  N.T.         31/7/16
    +Pte. Lewis, W.               203940  A    K. in A.         31/7/16
    +Pte. Leadbetter, J.           32742  A    K. in A.         31/7/17
     Pte. Lee, H. J.                2322  B    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Lees, C. J.               3132  C    W.               15/6/15
     Sgt. Lester, E.                 230  B    W.               29/6/15
     Pte. Legard, E. R.             2112  C    W.               30/8/15
    +Lance-Cpl. Leigh, J.           1387  D    K. in A.         16/6/15
    +Pte. Leach, T. E.              1633  C    K. in A.         16/6/15
    +Pte. Lee, G.                   2641  B    K. in A.         16/6/15
     Pte. Lee, J.                   1295  C    W.         N.T.   1/8/16
     Pte. Leeming, W.               1941  A    W.                2/8/16
     Pte. Leach, J.                 4415  C    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Lee, J.                   4903  B    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Lees, C. J.               3132  C    W.                5/8/16
     Pte. Lewis, J.                 4899  C    W.                9/9/16
     Pte. Lee, S. N.               40834  B    W.               30/9/18


    +Pte. Makinson, T. E.           5260  -    Died            25/11/16
     Pte. Madhill, T.               4408  A    W.         N.T.   9/9/16
     Pte. Marsh, T.                 4403  D    W.                9/9/16
     Pte. Malley, J.                2612  C    W.                9/9/16
     Pte. Martin, C. J.             3412  C    W.                9/9/16
     Pte. Marsden, J.               4008  A    W.                9/9/16
     Pte. May, A.                   4662  D    W.         N.T.   9/9/16
     Pte. Mather, T.              319533  C    W.               24/5/17
                                                           and 23/10/18
     Pte. Magnall, E.             202862  C    W.                4/6/17
    +2nd Lieut. Mather, V.           --   -    K. in A.         31/7/17
     Pte. Makinson, J.             31989  B    W.               31/7/17
     Pte. Massey, L.              201735  C    W.               31/7/17
     Pte. Marchant, J.             12292  B    W.               31/7/17
     Pte. Marsh, S.               202556  A    R.P. of W.       31/7/17
     Pte. Marsden, F.              42370  C    Missing    N.T.  31/7/17
    +Pte. Mannion, D. E.           36188  C    K. in A.         31/7/17
    +Pte. Mair, J.                 26419  D    K. in A.         31/7/17
     2nd Lieut. Martin, A.           --   -    W.               20/9/17
     Pte. Marsden, R.             202071  C    R.P. of W.      18/11/17
     Pte. Marsh, P.                35254  C    W.              18/11/17
     Pte. Mather, T.              290822  A    W.              30/11/17
     Pte. Makin, R.               202106  B    W.              30/11/17
     Cpl. Maher, J.               200379  D    Missing           9/4/18
    +Pte. Matthews, T.              1043  C    K. in A.         15/6/15
    +Pte. Mawsdley, T.              1486  D    K. in A.          2/4/16
    +2nd Lieut. Martin, A.           --   -    K. in A.         28/6/16
     Pte. Marden, F.                 761  B    W.               14/6/15
     Pte. Marshall, H.               787  C    W.               25/5/16
     Pte. Maymon, J. W.             2576  B    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Macheter, J.              2639  C    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Mather, W. H.             2969  C    W.               15/6/15
    +Pte. Mansel, A. E.            35247  -    Died             21/5/18
    +Pte. Marsden, J.             201473  -    K. in A.          9/9/16
    +Pte. Matsell, J. H.          235012  -    K. in A.         31/7/17
     Pte. Maden, S.                 3069  C    W.              18/11/17
     Pte. McGinnerty, W.            4124  D    W.                9/9/16
     Pte. McHugh, J.               21482  D    W.               12/7/17
     Pte. McNamara, P.            235410  A    W.         N.T.  13/7/17
    +Pte. McCartney, H.           202584  C    K. in A.         21/7/17
     Pte. McGreal, J.             201829  C    W.               21/7/17
     Pte. McKerney, H.            201758  B    W.               31/7/17
     Pte. McDougall, T.           200354  A    W.               31/7/17
     2nd Lieut. McSweeny, D. A.      --   -    R.P. of W.       31/7/17
    +Pte. McGerr, J.               17525  B    K. in A.         31/7/17
     Pte. McMahon, J. J.          202494  B    W.               31/7/17
     Pte. McDerby, J.             241755  B    W.               31/7/17
     Pte. McEwen, R.               34318  A    W.              20/11/17
    +Pte. McDonald, R.            200205  C    Pres. K.          5/6/15
     Pte. McKeown, J.               2736  B    W.               19/4/18
                                               D. of W.          9/7/18
     Pte. McGunnigle, P.            2269  A    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. McDougall, F.             1682  A    W.               19/9/15
     Pte. McCarthy, J.              4909  D    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. McGovern, J.              2634  C    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. McWilliams, H.            4148  D    W.                8/8/16
    +Cpl. McCullough, R.            1985  D    K. in A.          8/8/16
     Pte. McMahon, J.               1999  B    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. McGaughrey, O.           29162  A    W.               10/4/18
     Pte. McLacklan, A.            29420  C    W.               26/4/18
     Pte. McClure, W.               8731  D    W.         N.T.   2/6/18
     Pte. McDonald, J. E.          29421  A    W.               30/9/18
    +Pte. McCann, J.              242713  B    K. in A.         2/10/18
     Lance-Cpl. McNulty, J.         3150  B    W.              23/10/18
     Pte. McCormack, J.           203948  D    W.                4/9/18
     Lance-Cpl. McDonald, R.        1053  C    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. McConnell, J.           365952  C    R.P. of W.      18/11/17
    +Pte. May, G.                 202679  -    K. in A.         31/7/17
    +Pte. Martin, T.              202846  -    K. in A.          8/9/16
     Pte. Marsden, H.                151  D    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Makinson, N.               176  D    W.                1/6/15
     Pte. Marris, H.                 218  D    W.                1/6/15
                                                             and 8/8/16
     Pte. Martin, J. T.             1129  A    W.              15/10/15
     Pte. Mayman, J.               25761  B    W.              19/10/15
     Pte. Martin, R.                 181  D    W.                1/4/16
     Pte. Marsh, J.                 3860  D    W.                1/4/16
    +Pte. Marris, L.                1476  D    K. in A.        15/06/15
    +Pte. Martin, W.                3003  A    K. in A.         16/6/15
    +Pte. Marginson, A.             3368  C    K. in A.         16/6/15
    +Pte. Maguire, J.                244  C    K. in A.         16/6/15
     Pte. Maries, J.                 311  C    W.               16/6/15
    +Pte. Marsden, F.                761  B    K. in A.        30/10/15
     Pte. Madders, I.               2405  C    W.                1/8/16
    +Pte. Mayor, J.                 4265  C    K. in A.          8/8/16
     Pte. Marsh, S.                 4428  D    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Marshall, J.               194  D    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Mayor, R.                 3177  B    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Mather, G.               37752  D    Missing    N.T.   8/4/18
     Pte. Mayoh, I. P.             25569  A    W.               10/4/18
     Pte. Marland, J.              19725  A    W.                2/5/18
     Pte. Malpas, J. H.            41230  C    W.                2/5/18
     Pte. Marsh, T.               243192  A    W.               14/5/18
                                                            and 24/9/18
     Pte. Maude, A.                32254  C    W.                2/6/18
     Pte. Massey, F.               30627  C    W.               20/7/18
     Pte. Massey, E.               30628  D    W.               15/8/16
     Pte. Malie, A.                30626  B    W.                4/9/18
     Pte. Mansley, J.              22463  B    W.                4/9/18
    +2nd Lieut. Marsden              --   -    Killed           11/9/18
     Sgt. Matthews, A. E.          41068  D    W.              22/10/18
    +Cpl. Manson, T. M.            36014  A    K. in A.        22/10/18
    +Pte. McHale, E.              202790  D    K. in A.        30/11/17
     Pte. Mellis, J.                4242  C    W.                9/9/16
     Pte. Metcalf, C. B.          202895  D    W.               19/5/17
     Pte. Mellars, C. H.          235028  C    W.               31/7/17
    +Sgt. Mercer, A.                1665  B    K. in A.         15/6/15
     Sgt. Meredith, R.              4402  C    Missing    N.T.   4/8/16
     Sgt. Melling, J.               1448  B    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Meadows, J.             202072  A    W.               27/5/18
     Pte. Metcalfe, R.             30996  C    W.               2/10/18
     Pte. Mellor, A.               34086  D    W.               14/5/18
     Pte. Miller, J.                1484  D    W.               29/9/16
     Pte. Miller, W.              241745  C    W.                5/6/17
    +Lance-Cpl. Middlehurst, A.   265750  B    K. in A.         31/7/16
     Pte. Minion, A.              200071  D    W.                9/8/16
                                                            and 20/9/17
     Pte. Miller, G.              200815  B    W.               20/9/17
     Pte. Mitchinson, D.            2073  D    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Miller, W. E.             2536  D    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Mills, J.                 2569  B    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Minnion, A.                159  D    W.               15/6/15
    +Pte. Middlehurst, W.         202663  -    K. in A.         31/7/17
     Pte. Milward, A.              42008  A    R.P. of W.       14/5/18
    +2nd Lieut. Milne, C.            --   -    K. in A.         14/5/18
     Sgt. Miller, J.              200293  D    W.               1/10/18
     Pte. Midgley, A. C.           29486  D    W.               30/9/18
     Pte. Minors, S.               30927  B    R.P. of W.      23/10/18
     Pte. Mitchell, R.             25152  A    W.               14/5/18
     Pte. Morgan, J.                1797  B    W.                9/9/16
    +Pte. Moncur, J.                2320  A    W.               15/6/15
                                               K. in A.          9/9/16
     Pte. Molyneaux, J.             4267  A    W.                9/9/16
    +Pte. Moore, E.                 6286  D    Died             2/10/18
     Pte. Moulding, F. N.           1466  B    W.               29/9/16
    +Pte. Morris, H.                 218  D    K. in A.          8/8/16
     Capt. Matthew, F. K.            --   -    W.              30/11/17
    +Pte. Moore, J.                 3486  -    K. in A.          1/6/16
    +Pte. Morris, L.                1476  B    K. in A.         15/6/15
    +Pte. Mort, N.                203801  -    Died             19/2/17
    +Pte. Moscrop, S.             202624  C    D. of W.        14/7/17;
                                                               19/11/17
    +Pte. Morgan, E. J.           245090  C    K. in A.         18/7/17
     Pte. Moss, R.                201386  B    W.               31/7/17
     Pte. Molyneaux, A. E.        201734  C    W.               31/7/17
     Pte. Monks, W.                11723  A    W.               31/7/17
     Pte. Moulding, F.            200286  B    W.               31/7/17
    +Pte. Morley, W.              202495  B    K. in A.         31/7/17
     Pte. Monen, M.                28078  A    W.               19/9/17
     Pte. Moscrop, S.             202654  C    W.              18/11/17
     Pte. Molloy, J.              200654  C    W.              18/11/17
     Pte. Moss, O.                202638  A    R.P. of W.        9/4/18
     Pte. Morgan, E. H.           245113  B    W.                9/4/18
     2nd Lieut. Moore, K.            --   -    W.               15/6/15
    +Lieut. Moore, K.                --   -    K. in A.        26/11/15
    +Pte. Monks, E.                 1421  D    K. in A.          1/4/16
    +Pte. Morris, R. P.             5195  D    Drowned in Somme 28/7/16
     Lance-Cpl. Moore, T.           1350  D    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Morley, T.                1745  A    W.               15/6/15
     Cpl. Moss, J. A.               1752  B    W.               30/5/15
     Pte. Money, S.                 1784  B    W.               15/6/15
     Lance-Cpl. Monks, J.           2003  D    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Montague, E.              2833  B    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Morris, F.                4456  A    W.               20/4/16
    +Pte. Morris, J.                1294  C    K. in A.         15/6/15
    +Pte. Moss, J.                  2652  B    K. in A.         16/6/15
    +Pte. Morley, S.                4237  C    K. in A.          4/8/16
    +Pte. Moss, R.                  2972  B    K. in A.          5/8/16
    +Pte. Mounsey, J.               4525  D    Died              8/8/16
     Pte. Morgan, C.                4374  B    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Morris, T.                4962  B    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Moreton, R. H. A.         2864  -    W.         N.T.  10/4/18
     Pte. Morton, T.               21344  C    W.                6/7/18
     Pte. Molloy, J.               30926  D    W.                4/9/18
     Pte. Morgan, L.                4727  B    W.         N.T.   4/9/18
                                               Missing         23/10/18
     Pte. Morris, H.               30668  A    W.                8/9/18
    +Pte. Moss, B.                 30679  A    K. in A.        23/10/18
     Pte. Moss, J.                 25580  C    W.              23/10/18
     Cpl. Mooney, J.               25243  B    W.                4/9/18
     Cpl. Murphy, J.                6692  C    W.               24/5/17
     Pte. Muin, R. A. B.           36182  B    R.P. of W.       31/7/17
     Pte. Murray, P.                2864  D    W.               20/9/17
                                               Missing           9/4/18
     Sgt. Murray, A. P.           283018  B    W.               25/3/18
                                                             and 4/9/18
     Pte. Mulliner, E. A.           1602  C    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Murray, W.                2285  B    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Murray, J.                2730  A    W.               31/7/16
     Lance-Cpl. Muncaster, R.     200837  A    W.                9/4/18
     Pte. Muse, J.                 41508  A    W.               14/5/18
     Pte. Murphy, J.                6693  C    W.                4/9/18
     2nd Lieut Myers, B.             --   -    W.               20/9/17
     2nd Lieut. Munroe, C. S.        --   -    W.                3/8/16


    +Pte. Naylor, A.                2078  D    K. in A.         15/6/15
    +Sgt. Nabb, F.                202934  B    K. in A.         31/7/17
    +Pte. Nelson, A.                2703  A    W.               15/6/15
                                               D. of W.         20/7/17
     Pte. Nelson, T.                4496  C    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Nelson, G. A.             2909  B    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Neville, J.             202778  D    W.                9/6/17
     Pte. Nelson, T.              201321  B    R.P. of W.       31/7/17
    +Pte. Newman, J. E.            35311  B    K. in A.         31/7/17
     Pte. Newsham, J.             203421  C    W.              31/07/17
    +Pte. Nelson, J.               41668  D    K. in A.         29/4/18
     Pte. Needham, A.              30632  B    W.               16/8/18
    +Pte. Nelson, J.               14939  -    K. in A.         31/7/17
     Cpl. Nelson, G. H            240856  D    W.                4/9/18
     Pte. Netherwood, W.           39954  A    W.                9/9/18
    +Pte. Neilson, R. R            41080  C    K. in A.         1/10/18
    +Pte. Nere, L.                 29393  B    K. in A.        23/10/18
    +Pte. Newbery, H.              29164  C    K. in A.         17/6/18
    +Pte. Nickson, R.               2560  A    K. in A.         11/7/15
     Pte. Nixon, R.                 1467  D    W.               15/6/15
    +Sgt. Nixon, R.                 1467  B    D. of W.         23/8/16
     Pte. Nicholson, J.             2934  B    W.         N.T.  28/6/16
     Pte. Neild, W.                34562  C    W.         N.T.  27/2/18
    +Pte. Nightingale, J.         203589  A    K. in A.          9/4/18
    +Pte. Nicolls, J. W.           37806  C    W.                2/5/18
                                               K. in A.         1/10/18
     Pte. Nicholson, S. T.         35721  C    W.                3/9/18
    +Major Nickson                   --   -    K. in A.        30/10/16
     Pte. Nightingale, T.         203884  C    W.                3/9/18
    +Pte. Nichols, J. W.           37806  C    K. in A.         1/10/18
     2nd Lieut. Nicholson, J. E. P.  --   -    W.              30/11/17
     Pte. Nowell, M.                1417  A    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Norwood, K.               2229  B    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Norris, J. H.             1552  C    W.               29/8/15
     2nd Lieut. Nolan, M. W.         --   -    W.              30/10/15
     Pte. Norcross, J.              4036  A    W.                9/9/16
     Pte. Nowell, M.              200267  D    W.                6/5/17
     Pte. Norris, L.                2361  C    W.               20/9/17
     Lance-Cpl. Norris, P.        201356  B    W.               20/9/17
     Pte. Norris, T.               28165  B    W.         N.T.  25/4/18
     Cpl. Norris, J.              240026  B    W.                2/6/18
     Pte. Norris, A.               34075  B    W.              23/10/18
     Pte. Nolan, T.                41532  B    Missing         23/10/18
     Capt. and Adjt. Norman, C. C.
       (R.W.F.)                      --   -    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Nutter, W.                4361  C    W.         N.T.   9/9/16
    +Sgt. Nuttall, J.               1666  A    D. of W.         9/9/16;
                                                                11/9/16
     Lance-Cpl. Nutter, H.         20809  A    W.              30/11/17
     Pte. Nuttall, H.              29166  C    W.                9/4/18
     Pte. Nuttall, J.              30631  C    W.                1/8/18
     Lance-Cpl. Nugent, J. E.      29900  C    W.                3/9/18
     Pte. Nutter, W.               25397  B    W.                4/9/18
     Pte. Nuttall, J. H.          204997  B    W.              30/11/17
                                                             and 9/4/18
    +Pte. Nuttall, T.             202690  -    K. in A.         31/7/17


     Pte. Oakley, C.               34333  -    W.               31/7/17
    +Pte. Oates, P.                32251  -    D. of W.        20/9/17;
                                                                24/9/17
     Pte. O’Brien, P.               5630  C    W.                5/8/16
    +Pte. O’Brian, W. O.            4318  A    K. in A.          8/8/16
     Pte. O’Brian, S.             202810  A    W.               29/9/16
     Pte. O’Connor, J.              4817  C    W.                9/9/16
    +Pte. O’Conner, J.             32142  D    D. of W.         26/3/18
    +Pte. Oddie, G.               202826  B    K. in A.          9/4/18
    +Pte. O’Flynn, C. E.          203518  B    D. of W.        31/7/17;
                                                                 1/8/17
     Pte. O’Grady, C.               1970  B    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Ogden, J.               202774  C    W.                9/9/16
     Pte. Ogden, B.               202585  D    W.               31/7/17
     Pte. O’Grady, C.             200045  B    W.         N.T.  16/8/18
     Pte. Ogden, W.                42011  A    W.                7/9/18
    +Pte. O’Heary, A.              17548  D    K. in A.   N.T.   9/4/18
     Pte. O’Keife, J.               4912  B    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Oliver, C.                2838  B    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Oldnall, H.               2718  C    W.               15/6/15
                                                             and 3/8/16
     2nd Lieut. Oldham               --   -    W.               20/9/17
     Pte. Oldfield, A. E.          39516  C    W.                5/9/18
    +Pte. Oldfield, J. T.           6261  -    D. of W.         20/9/16
     Pte. O’Melia, W.               3870  C    W.                8/8/16
    +Pte. O’Neill, T.               3122  C    K. in A.         15/6/15
    +Pte. O’Neal, C. F.             6319  C    K. in A.         28/9/16
     Pte. O’Neil, G.              201073  C    W.               21/7/17
     Pte. Ormerod, G.               2558  B    W.         N.T. 29/10/15
     2nd Lieut. Orrell, J. H.        --   -    W.               31/7/17
     Pte. Ormerod, T.               4913  C    W.                8/8/16
    +Pte. Ormerod, O.             202739  C    K. in A.          9/9/16
    +Pte. Ormerod, J. R.            6248  C    K. in A.         25/9/16
     Major Ord, R.                   --   -    W.               31/7/17
     2nd Lieut. Ordish, J. E.        --   -    W.               31/7/17
     Pte. Ormerod, H.             200334  B    R.P. of W.       31/7/17
     Pte. Orrell, F.              240710  B    R.P. of W.        9/4/18
     Pte. Orr, C.                  30672  B    W.                4/9/18
     Pte. Orrell, R. J.           242868  B    W.               11/9/18
     2nd Lieut. Ostrehan, R. A.      --   -    W.                1/1/16
     Pte. Osbalderston, H.        201766  B    W.               12/7/17
    +Lieut. Ostrehan, D. H.          --   -    Presumed K.      31/7/17
     Lance-Cpl. Osgerby, H.       235003  B    W.               31/7/17
    +Sgt. Ouldcott, E.               251  D    W.               14/9/15
                                               K. in A.          8/8/16
     Pte. Ousey, S.                29394  B    W.               23/6/18
    +Lance-Cpl. Owen, E.            1900  A    K. in A.         15/6/15
     Pte. Owen, A.                  3444  A    W.                3/8/16
     Sgt. Owen, C. F.             200199  C    W.               27/4/18
    +Pte. Owen, H. R.             238034  A    K. in A.         20/5/18
     Pte. Owen, W.                 40770  A    W.              23/10/18
     Pte. Oxford, G.                6355  D    W.                8/8/16
    +Pte. Oxford, N.               27722  D    D. of W.        12/4/18;
                                                                 9/5/18
    +Pte. O’Neil, P.                3019  -    K. in A.         15/6/15
    +2nd Lieut. Ogden, J. H.         --   -    W.              22/10/16
                                               K. in A.         31/7/17


    +Pte. Parkinson, R.             1085  -    Died at Home     2/11/14
     Pte. Parkinson, J. A.          1690  A    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Parkinson, C.             1926  D    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Park, L.                  2663  B    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Park, T.                  2877  D    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Parkinson, T.             2876  B    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Park, F.                    86  B    W.               15/6/15
     Cpl. Parkinson, J.              333  B    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Parkinson, R.             1079  C    W.               9/10/15
     Lance-Cpl. Parkinson, R.       1079  B    W.               31/7/17
     Pte. Parkinson, H.             2839  B    W.               6/11/15
    +Pte. Parr, E.                  2584  A    K. in A.         15/6/15
    +Pte. Parkinson, J.               70  D    K. in A.         15/6/15
    +Pte. Palmer, J.                4101  B    D. of W.         3/8/16;
                                                                 7/8/16
     C.S.M. Parkinson, E.            332  D    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Parkinson, H.             2839  B    W.                8/8/16
     Lance-Sgt. Parkinson, A.        226  C    W.                8/9/16
    +Pte. Park, W.                  1586  A    K. in A.          9/9/16
     Pte. Partington, J.            4915  B    W.                9/9/16
     Pte. Parkinson, F.             2515  B    W.              22/11/16
    +Pte. Parkinson, W.           202132  D    K. in A.          4/4/17
     C.Q.M.S. Parkinson, W.       200178  A    W.               31/7/17
     Pte. Parkinson, T. H.        202425  A    W.               31/7/17
     Pte. Parkinson, W.           200818  B    W.               31/7/17
     Lance-Cpl. Parkinson, W.     200818  B    W.               16/8/18
     Lance-Cpl. Parkinson, T.     200259  B    W.               20/9/17
     Pte. Park, T.                200782  D    W.               20/9/17
     Cpl. Parkinson, W.           200167  C    W.               20/9/17
    +Pte. Parker, R.              202606  D    K. in A.         20/9/17
     Pte. Parkinson, J.           245161  D    W.               20/9/17
     Major Parker, H.                --   A    W.               20/9/16
    +Pte. Parker, G.               31774  A    K. in A.         20/9/17
     Pte. Parkinson, T.           200931  C    W.              30/10/17
    +Pte. Parkinson, C.            25343  C    K. in A.        18/11/17
     Cpl. Partington, J.          202079  B    W.              20/11/17
     Cpl. Parkinson, A.           200111  C    W.              30/11/17
     Pte. Paisley, D.             201357  D    W.                9/4/18
     Pte. Payne, C. J.             36600  D    W.                9/4/18
     Pte. Parkinson, J. S.         19100  D    R.P. of W.       12/4/18
    +Pte. Parker, J.               38661  C    K. in A.          9/4/18
     Pte. Patterson, H. C.        244807  C    W.               29/4/18
    +Pte. Palmer, E.               39677  A    K. in A.         14/5/18
     Pte. Parry, R.                13356  B    W.               27/5/18
                                                            and 30/9/18
    +2nd Lieut. Pasley, W. E.        --   -    K. in A.         17/6/18
     Pte. Parkinson, T.            29679  B    W.                4/9/18
     Sgt. Parkinson, W.           200167  C    W.                4/9/18
    +Sgt. Parkinson, R.           200218  C    K. in A.          7/9/18
     2nd Lieut. Parkinson, H.        --   -    W.               1/10/18
     Pte. Parker, R.               41252  A    W.               30/9/18
     Lance-Cpl. Park, T.          200782  D    W.               30/9/18
    +Sgt. Parkinson, R.           200218  C    K. in A.        13/10/18
    +Pte. Parker, T.               37647  B    K. in A.        23/10/18
    +Lance-Cpl. Parkinson, J.     240117  B    K. in A.         16/8/18
    +Pte. Passy, J.                28091  A    K. in A.        30/11/17
     Pte. Parry, E.               290815  C    W.                9/4/18
     Pte. Palmer, A.              241827  C    W.                9/4/18
    +Lance-Cpl. Perry, A. J.         275  A    K. in A.         15/6/15
     Pte. Pennington, A. E.         2737  B    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Perry, R.                 5029  A    W.                8/9/16
     Pte. Pearson, J.               3163  C    R.P. of W.        9/9/16
     Pte. Pelzer, W.                6127  C    W.               27/9/16
                                                           and 15/11/16
     Pte. Peel, W. E. M.            6250  C    W.              18/11/16
     Pte. Pendlebury, J.          202602  A    W.               20/9/17
     Pte. Pendlebury, T.          290665  C    W.               20/9/17
     Pte. Perry, A.                16836  A    W.              20/11/17
     Pte. Pearsley, A.            201369  B    W.               24/4/18
     Cpl. Pendlebury, F.          290665  C    W.               28/7/18
     Pte. Pemberton, C.            19993  C    W.                4/9/18
     Pte. Perry, R.               202156  A    W.               15/9/18
    +Pte. Pearce, J.               14299  C    K. in A.        23/10/18
     Pte. Perry, R.               200760  B    R.P. of W.      23/10/18
     Pte. Pendlebury, W.           19894  B    W.               19/8/18
    +Capt. Peak, J. A.               --   -    Presumed Killed  15/6/15
     Pte. Pendlebury, W.           19894  B    W.                9/4/18
     Pte. Phillips, H.             12068  B    W.               20/9/17
     Sgt. Pilkington, W.          200291  D    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Pickup, J.                2788  A    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Pickering, G. N.          3239  C    W.               15/6/15
    +Pte. Pilkington, G.             145  D    K. in A.         15/6/15
     C.S.M. Pilkington, W.          1481  B    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Pickup, J.                2458  A    W.         N.T.   8/9/16
    +Pte. Pinner, E.              202759  C    K. in A.          9/9/16
     Pte. Pimley, R.                1925  B    W.                9/9/16
     Pte. Pincock, J.             202969  C    W.               31/7/17
    +Pte. Pilkington, J.           36169  B    W.               31/7/17
                                                            and 20/9/17
                                               K. in A.          9/4/18
    +Sgt. Pitcher, F.             200809  B    D. of W.        20/9/17;
                                                                22/9/17
     Pte. Pickles, F. S.          202619  D    W.               20/9/17
     Sgt. Piper, F.                18004  A    W.               14/9/18
     Cpl. Plummer, J.               1649  A    W.                9/9/16
     Pte. Pollitt, J.             242087  C    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Potter, R.                4319  B    W.                8/8/16
     2nd Lieut. Pollard, P.          --   -    W.                9/9/16
     Lance-Cpl. Porter, T.          2537  C    W.                9/9/16
     Pte. Porter, W. G.            36906  A    W.               17/7/17
                                                            and 20/9/17
    +Pte. Potter, T.               32027  C    K. in A.         21/7/17
     Sgt. Porter, J.              266047  C    W.               20/9/17
    +Pte. Poole, H.               200686  D    W.              30/11/17
                                               D. of W.         3/12/17
    +Pte. Pomfret. J.             202696  -    K. in A.         26/4/18
     C.S.M. Porter, R.            290177  A    W.               20/5/18
     Lance-Cpl. Porter. W.         32934  B    W.                2/6/18
    +Pte. Porteous, G.            235511  C    D. of W.        14/10/18
    +Pte. Power, C.               202129  D    K. in A.         21/7/17
     Pte. Price, H.                 1690  C    W.         N.T.  15/6/15
     Pte. Procter, H.               2540  B    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Preston, W.               4515  C    Missing    N.T.   9/9/16
     Pte. Preston, A.               4914  C    W.                9/9/16
    +Pte. Preston, J.              12760  -    K. in A.          9/4/18
    +Lance-Cpl. Procter, J.         4067  B    K. in A.          9/9/16
     Lance-Cpl. Procter, A.       201663  A    W.               31/7/17
    +Sgt. Price, T. R.             33176  A    K. in A.   N.T.  31/7/17
     Pte. Priebe, W. O.            35399  B    W.               31/7/17
     Lance-Cpl. Procter, A.       202811  A    W.               31/7/17
    +Lance-Cpl. Preston, T.       200621  D    K. in A.         20/9/17
     Cpl. Prescott, S.            200077  D    W.               23/9/17
     Sgt. Prescott, S.            200077  D    W.                2/6/18
     Lance-Cpl. Prince, F.         29172  A    Missing          14/5/18
     Pte. Procter, C.             205071  B    W.                4/9/18
     Pte. Price, J.                30973  B    W.         N.T.  30/9/18
     Capt. Price, W. L.              --   -    W.              15/10/18
     Pte. Pringle, R. J.           31007  D    W.              22/10/18
     2nd Lieut. Pride, R.            --   -    W.               27/8/18
    +Pte. Preston, J.              12760  C    K. in A.          9/4/18
     Pte. Prestwich, D.            29423  B    W.              23/10/18
     Pte. Purcell, R.              35788  C    W.                4/9/18
    +Pte. Pye, A.                   2577  A    K. in A.         16/6/15
     Pte. Pye, P.                   2202  B    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Pye, F.                   2571  B    W.               15/6/15
    +2nd Lieut. Pyke, W. E.          --   -    K. in A.          9/9/16
    +Pte. Pate, R.                 27624  -    K. in A.        26/10/17


     Pte. Quinn, J.                 4349  C    W.         N.T.   9/9/16
     Pte. Quirk, W.               203426  B    W.               31/7/17


    +Lance-Cpl. Ramsbottom, R.     37694  -    K. in A.          9/4/18
    +Pte. Rathbone, S. J.           2108  C    K. in A.         15/6/15
     Cpl. Rance, F.                 1610  C    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Ranson, J. G.             2648  C    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Rankin, H.                2790  A    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Rathbone, J. T.           3474  D    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Rankin, H.                2790  A    W.               31/7/16
    +Pte. Ranson, H.                2651  B    K. in A.         16/6/15
    +2nd Lieut. Rawsthorn, A. E.     --   -    K. in A.         15/6/15
     Pte. Ramsden, B.               4918  B    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Rayton, H.                3129  D    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Rapson, S.                6195  A    W.                9/9/16
     Pte. Rawcliffe, A. E.          3370  B    W.                9/9/16
     Pte. Rainford, C.              4997  B    W.                9/9/16
     Pte. Ralphs, H.                4919  D    W.              14/12/16
     Pte. Rapson, V.              202815  A    W.                1/4/17
    +Pte. Ratcliffe, J.           202692  A    K. in A.         31/7/17
    +Pte. Ramsden, C.             202695  B    W.               31/7/17
                                               K. in A.         26/9/18
     Pte. Race, A. F.             235117  A    W.               20/9/17
    +Pte. Rathbone, D.             12910  C    K. in A.         19/9/17
    +Pte. Raby, G. A.              25872  C    K. in A.        18/11/17
     Pte. Ratcliffe, G.           265997  A    W.               14/5/18
    +Pte. Ray, F.                 202080  -    K. in A.          8/8/16
     Pte. Ranson, A. E.           260119  D    W.              22/10/18
     Pte. Rafferty, G.             30935  A    W.              23/10/18
    +Lance-Cpl. Reid, J.              52  A    K. in A.         15/6/15
     Pte. Rees, J.                243123  C    W.                4/8/16
    +Capt. Rennard, E. M.            --   -    K. in A.          8/8/16
     Pte. Renwick, W.               4544  C    Missing    N.T.   9/9/16
    +Pte. Read, J. R.             202433  B    K. in A.          1/3/17
     Pte. Read, J.                 36204  A    Missing         30/10/17
     Pte. Rees, T.                 35633  C    R.P. of W.      15/11/17
     Pte. Read, R.                 31785  B    Missing           9/4/18
     Pte. Reddish, F.              28064  D    W.               12/4/18
     Pte. Reeves, J. W.            42012  A    W.         N.T.  14/5/18
     Pte. Reid, J. R.             290490  D    W.         N.T.  16/8/18
     Pte. Reid, A.                 30635  D    W.               16/8/16
     Pte. Relph, H.                23265  B    W.               30/9/18
     Pte. Reid, A.                 30635  D    W.               16/8/18
    +Pte. Redman, J. C.            29178  D    K. in A.          4/9/18
    +Pte. Riding, H.                2544  -    Died at Home      6/4/15
    +Pte. Riley, J.                 1440  D    W.               15/6/15
                                               D. of W.          9/8/16
     Pte. Rigby, J.                 1608  C    W.               15/6/15
    +Pte. Richardson, H.            1952  A    W.               15/6/15
                                               K. in A.          8/8/16
     Pte. Rigby, J. T.              2854  D    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Rigby, H.                 3156  D    W.               28/6/15
     Pte. Richardson, J.            4174  C    W.               14/7/16
    +Pte. Rigby, T.                 1024  C    K. in A.         16/6/15
    +Pte. Riding, W.                2062  D    K. in A.         16/6/15
    +Lance-Cpl. Rigby, J. T.        2854  D    K. in A.          5/8/16
     Pte. Riley, H.               200436  C    W.                8/8/16
    +Pte. Rigby, T.               241616  C    W.                8/8/16
                                               Died at Sea       4/5/17
     Pte. Riley, R. S.              1614  C    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Richardson, J.            1951  A    W.                9/9/16
    +Pte. Riley, H.                 1440  D    D. of W.          9/8/16
     Pte. Rimmer, D.                2696  C    W.                9/9/16
     Pte. Richardson, G.           27435  C    W.               14/4/17
     Pte. Riley, J. E.             23269  A    W.                5/6/17
     Pte. Ridehalgh, F.           202813  A    W.               16/7/17
    +Pte. Rigby, J.               202726  D    K. in A.         21/7/18
     2nd Lieut. Rigby, C.            --   -    Missing          31/7/17
     Pte. Richmond, J.            201410  D    W.               20/9/17
     Pte. Richardson, J. J.        23208  D    W.               20/9/17
     Pte. Ridehough, G.           202689  A    W.               20/9/17
                                                           and 30/11/17
     Pte. Rigby, C.               208089  C    Missing    N.T. 18/11/17
     Pte. Rigby, R.               202409  B    R.P. of W.        9/4/18
     Pte. Ridsdell, J.            260131  D    W.         N.T.   9/4/18
     Pte. Rigby, R.                24010  C    W.               12/4/18
     Pte. Rigby, J. E.             25533  C    W.               10/5/18
    +Pte. Ridgard, J.              29181  A    K. in A.         14/5/18
     Lance-Sgt. Ridgway, L.       240216  A    W.               18/5/18
     Pte. Richardson, E. R.        29175  C    W.                2/6/18
     Pte. Riley, J.               202868  C    W.               18/6/18
     Pte. Rickard, H.              39205  D    W.               27/8/18
     Pte. Rigby, J. E.             25533  C    W.                8/9/18
    +Pte. Rigby, M.                29395  B    K. in A.         14/9/18
    +Pte. Riding, G.               41904  B    K. in A.         28/9/18
     Pte. Richardson, J.          203587  D    W.               30/9/18
     Cpl. Richie, D.              200705  A    W. and
                                               R.P. of W.      23/10/18
     Cpl. Riding, C.               29180  A    W.              23/10/18
     Pte. Ripley, J.               30650  D    W.               16/8/18
     Cpl. Robinson, R.              1109  C    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Round, W.                 2516  C    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Robinson, T. E. W.        2582  B    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Robinson, H.              2850  C    W.               15/6/15
                                                             and 8/8/16
     Pte. Robinson, A.              1569  A    W.               3/11/15
     Pte. Roughsedge, G.             128  D    W.               1/11/15
     2nd Lieut. Rogerson, H.         --   -    W.                1/1/16
     Pte. Robinson, W.              2000  B    W.               27/3/16
    +Pte. Rogerson, G.              2414  C    K. in A.         16/6/15
    +Pte. Robinson, J.              4307  A    D. of W.          2/8/16
    +Pte. Robinson, G. S.         235023  -    K. in A.         20/9/17
     Pte. Round, S.                 2539  C    W.                8/8/16
    +Pte. Robinson, H.            202637  C    K. in A.         28/8/16
     Pte. Roberts, H.               1483  D    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Robinson, J.            243208  D    W.                8/8/16
     Lance-Cpl. Rollins, F.         1447  D    W.                8/8/16
    +Pte. Robinson, P.              6252  C    D. of W.         12/9/16
    +Lance-Cpl. Robinson, W.        3819  C    K. in A.          9/9/16
     Pte. Roberts, A.               4488  C    W.                9/9/16
    +Pte. Roberts, J.               4477  D    K. in A.        24/12/16
     Pte. Roughsedge, H.            5578  A    W.                9/1/17
    +Pte. Rossall, J.             201554  B    K. in A.         19/5/17
     Pte. Rogers, W. B.           202504  B    W.                3/6/17
     Pte. Robbins, E. H.           33874  B    W.                2/7/17
     Pte. Robinson, G.            200315  A    W.               15/7/17
     Pte. Rollins, J.             200088  D    W.               30/7/17
     Pte. Roscoe, J.              290273  B    W.               31/7/17
    +Pte. Rowett, C.              201027  B    K. in A.         31/7/17
     Pte. Rooney, W.              201208  B    W.               31/7/17
    +Pte. Robinson, C. W.         235043  B    K. in A.         31/7/17
    +Pte. Robinson, F.            200637  -    K. in A.         15/6/15
     Pte. Rossall, W.             203010  C    W.               31/7/17
     Pte. Roberts, J. W.           37249  C    W.               20/9/17
     Pte. Roberts, A. T.          290669  C    W.               20/9/17
     Pte. Roberts, O.              36177  A    W.               21/9/17
     Pte. Roach, F.               290214  D    R.P. of W.      18/11/17
     Sgt. Robinson, H.            200577  B    W.              30/11/17
     Lance-Sgt. Robinson, J.      201390  B    W.              30/11/17
     Pte. Rourke, J.               25201  D    W.                9/4/18
    +Pte. Roughly, A.              27663  B    K. in A.          9/4/18
     Pte. Robinson, A.            243762  -    W.                9/4/18
     C.S.M. Roberts, H.           200081  B    W.                7/6/17
     Pte. Robbins, C. H.           33874  B    W.                9/4/18
    +Lance-Cpl. Rooney, W.        201208  B    W.               25/4/18
                                               K. in A.         11/5/18
     Pte. Roberts, J.              34038  A    W.               14/5/18
     Pte. Rose, B.                 39681  A    W.               14/5/18
     Sgt. Roberts, G.             243767  C    W.               14/5/18
     Lance-Cpl. Rogerson, R.      200822  A    W.                8/9/18
    +Pte. Roberts, J.             203239  D    K. in A.        11/09/18
    +Pte. Robinson, J.            245202  A    K. in A.         1/10/18
     Cpl. Robinson, J.            243767  D    W.         N.T.  30/9/18
     Pte. Rose, J. E.              40469  D    W.              22/10/18
     Pte. Robinson, A.            265288  D    W.         N.T.  11/4/18
     Pte. Rukin, J.                 1051  C    W.               15/6/15
    +Pte. Rutter, W.                1367  D    W.               15/6/15
                                               K. in A.          1/4/16
     Pte. Rushton, J.               2578  C    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Rushton, W.             202551  B    R.P. of W.       31/7/17
     Pte. Rudge, E. A.             30653  D    R.P. of W.       16/8/18
     Pte. Ryan, T. W.             200568  A    W.               15/6/15
                                                            and 18/7/17
     Pte. Ryan, J.                200409  B    W.              12/12/16
     Pte. Ryan, S.                202747  D    W.               13/6/17


     Sgt. Sanderson, F.              197  D    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Sanderson, R.           201006  C    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Samson, D.                5005  B    W.                9/9/16
                                                             and 7/6/17
     Pte. Saul, T.                  5298  B    W.               26/9/16
     Pte. Sandham, W.             201462  A    W.               29/5/17
     Pte. Savage, E.              202683  D    W.               10/7/17
    +Pte. Savery, F.              245109  C    K. in A.         31/7/17
     Pte. Sandham, J.             200398  C    W.               20/9/18
     Sgt. Saltmarsh, A.            29396  C    W.               29/9/18
     Pte. Sandford, H.             26647  D    W.              18/11/17
     Pte. Sandham, J.             200398  D    W.               13/4/18
     Pte. Salmon, H.              202639  A    W.               14/5/18
     Pte. Salisbury, S.           202441  D    W.               31/7/17
    +Pte. Savage, G. F.            31909  A    K. in A.         20/9/17
     Pte. Salisbury, G.           241107  A    W.               20/9/17
     Pte. Scudamore, R.            21168  A    W.               14/5/17
                                                            and 31/7/17
     Pte. Scott, J.               202784  D    W.               10/7/17
    +Pte. Scriven, A. H.          235039  A    K. in A.         31/7/17
     2nd Lieut. Scott, T. H. H.      --   -    W.                8/7/18
    +Pte. Scattergood, J.          30651  A    K. in A.          8/9/18
    +Pte. Scowcroft, W.            37227  D    W.               20/9/17
                                               K. in A.          9/4/18
     Pte. Scowcroft, R.           202649  C    W.               21/9/17
     Cpl. Scott, F.               201253  A    W.               20/9/17
                                                           and 23/10/18
    +Pte. Scott, J. H.            202388  D    K. in A.        18/11/17
     Sgt. Scholes, H.              12176  B    W.              14/10/18
    +Cpl. Scott, F.               201253  A    K. in A.        23/10/18
     2nd Lieut. Scott, T. H. H.      --   -    W.                3/9/18
     Pte. Scholl, A. V.            35393  B    W.                9/4/18
     Sgt. Seed, J.                   473  A    W.               15/6/15
     Lance-Cpl. Seed, Wm.           1137  A    W.               15/6/15
     Cpl. Seed, A.                  1663  A    W.               15/6/15
    +Sgt. Seed, A.                  1663  A    K. in A.          9/9/16
     Pte. Seddon, W.                2089  D    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Sergeant, E.                23  B    W.               15/6/15
     Lance-Cpl. Seddon, J. W.         71  B    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Sewell, W. S.             4424  A    W.               21/6/16
    +Pte. Seed, J.                  2722  B    K. in A.         15/6/15
    +Pte. Sellars, G.               3281  D    K. in A.         15/6/15
     C.Q.M.S. Seed, W.              1660  A    W.                2/8/16
     Pte. Selfe, H.                 3918  D    W.                5/8/16
    +Cpl. Seed, H.                200344  A    K. in A.          8/8/16
     Pte. Senior, B.                4557  C    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Settle, J.                7564  C    W.                8/8/16
    +Sgt. Seddon, G.                1434  D    K. in A.          8/8/16
     Pte. Seddon, J.                2010  D    W.                8/8/16
     Sgt. Seel, W.                  2786  D    W.                8/8/16
    +Sgt. Sedgwick, T.                93  A    K. in A.          9/9/16
    +Lance-Cpl. Sephton, H. V.    202662  A    D. of W.          7/7/17
     Pte. Sergeant, J.             41284  D    W.                8/7/18
     Lance-Cpl. Seddon, R.        290066  D    W.               16/8/18
     Pte. Sellar, W. L.            29190  C    W.                3/9/18
     Pte. Seddon, H.              242031  B    W.                5/9/18
    +Pte. Seddon, H.              201830  D    K. in A.         12/4/18
     Pte. Sewell, E.              290466  B    W.               25/4/18
    +Lance-Cpl. Seed, T.          200579  A    K. in A.         31/7/17
     Cpl. Searle, W. C.            41058  D    W.              15/10/18
     Lance-Cpl. Seddon, R.        290066  D    W.              22/10/18
    +Sgt. Seed, A.                  1663  B    K. in A.          9/9/16
    +Sgt. Skingsley, W.              398  A    K. in A.         15/6/15
    +Pte. Sharples, M.              1408  D    K. in A.         15/6/15
     Lance-Cpl. Sharples, W.        1103  A    W.               15/6/15
     Cpl. Sharples, J.              1140  B    W.               14/6/15
    +Sgt. Sharples, J.              1140  B    K. in A.          2/8/16
     Pte. Shipcott, W.              1793  A    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Shipcott, J.              1903  B    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Shipcott, W. J.           1930  B    W.               15/6/15
     Lance-Cpl. Sherrington, B.     2004  D    W.               15/6/15
     Lance-Cpl. Shuttleworth, F.      14  B    W.               29/5/16
     Pte. Sharples, P.               334  A    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Shorrock, J.              3248  C    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Shorrock, A.              3120  C    W.               26/3/16
     Pte. Sharples, W.              3456  A    W.               28/6/16
     Pte. Sharples, T.              3785  A    W.               27/6/16
                                                             and 8/8/16
    +Pte. Sharples, W. H.           2619  C    K. in A.         15/6/15
    +Pte. Shuttleworth, T.           106  B    K. in A.         15/6/15
     Pte. Shepherd, A.               182  D    W.                3/8/16
                                                             and 9/9/16
     Pte. Shaw, R.                  4530  B    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Shuttleworth, W.          4468  C    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Sharrocks, J.           201633  D    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Shenty, J.                3071  C    W.                9/9/16
    +Pte. Sharples, W.              1103  A    K. in A.          9/9/16
     Pte. Shepherd, J.              5046  B    W.               29/9/16
     Pte. Shepherd, F.              5629  A    W.                8/1/17
     Pte. Sharples, W.            200237  A    W.               21/7/17
    +Capt. Shegog, R. W.             --  (R.A.M.C.) K. in A.    31/7/17
    +Pte. Shepherd, F.            202600  A    K. in A.         31/7/17
     Pte. Sharples, H.             28129  C    W.         N.T.   6/7/18
     Lieut. Sholl, A. E.             --   -    W.               15/8/18
     Pte. Shaw, D.                200497  D    W.               15/8/18
     Pte. Sharples, H.             40871  B    W.               24/8/18
     Pte. Shepherd, R.             30638  D    W.                4/9/18
     Sgt. Sharples, W.            200423  D    W.               13/9/18
     Pte. Sharpe, R.               29492  A    W.               13/9/18
    +Pte. Shutler, F.              30639  B    K. in A.         14/9/18
     Pte. Shipsides, W.            28081  D    W.               6/12/17
     C.S.M. Sharples, H.        200043  D    W.              30/11/17
     Pte. Shuker, A.               33158  C    W.                9/4/18
     Pte. Shevlen, J.             201147  D    W.               13/4/18
    +Pte. Shackleton, H.           41679  B    K. in A.         25/4/18
     Pte. Shillabeer, E. J.        41680  A    W.               14/5/18
    +Pte. Sharp, J.               203718  B    Missing          31/7/17
                                               Died              1/1/19
     Pte. Shuttleworth, W.        368615  D    W.               31/7/17
                                          C    W.               20/9/17
    +Pte. Shaw, G.                 21770  A    K. in A.        20/09/17
    +2nd Lieut. Shippobottom, F.     --   -    D. of W.       18/11/17;
                                                               20/11/17
    +Pte. Sharman, F.              30936  D    K. in A.         30/9/18
    +Pte. Sharples, R. N.           1144  A    W.                9/9/16
                                               D. of W.         11/9/18
     Lance-Cpl. Simpson, W.         1026  B    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Silviera, C.              2113  B    W.         N.T.  30/5/15
     Pte. Singleton, R.             2314  A    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Simpson, J.               2387  D    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Simpson, A.               3228  B    W.               15/6/15
                                                             and 8/8/16
     Pte. Silcock, T.               3911  A    W.               31/7/17
     Pte. Silcock, L.               2796  C    W.               16/6/15
     Pte. Simpson, J. J.            3147  C    W.                9/9/16
     Pte. Singleton, J.             2824  B    W.                9/9/16
     Pte. Simpson, J. E.            6255  C    W.               26/9/16
     Pte. Simpson, J.             200941  C    W.               27/9/16
     Pte. Silcock, W.             212669  A    W.                1/4/17
    +Pte. Simpson, A.             202643  B    W.                3/5/17
                                               Died              4/6/17
     Cpl. Simpson, R.             201081  C    W.               10/6/17
     Pte. Simpson, T.              34309  C    W.               23/6/17
     Pte. Sidebottam, H.           32685  C    W.                3/6/18
     Pte. Simpson, J.             240843  C    W.                8/7/18
    +Pte. Singleton, W.           241473  D    Missing
                                               (Pres’d K.)     30/11/17
     Lance-Cpl. Simpson, J.       202870  C    W.               26/4/18
     Pte. Simmonite, W. E.        235005  C    W.               28/4/18
     Pte. Silvester, J.            27812  B    W.               28/4/18
     Pte. Simm, H.                 25667  B    W.               31/7/17
     Pte. Silcock, T.             201414  A    W.               20/9/17
    +Pte. Simm, W.                 17261  B    K. in A.        30/10/17
     Pte. Simpkin, J.              30937  A    W.              24/10/18
     Pte. Slater, T.              200957  B    W.               15/6/15
    +Pte. Slater, J.                1422  -    K. in A.         15/9/15
     Pte. Slater, I.                3323  D    W.               15/6/15
    +Pte. Slater, J.                1578  A    K. in A.          9/9/16
    +Pte. Slater, F.                1783  B    K. in A.         15/6/15
     Pte. Slater, G.              200732  B    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Slater, A.                3612  A    W.               31/7/17
     Pte. Slack, R.                42018  B    W.               27/5/18
     Pte. Slater, W.               23752  A    W.                7/6/18
    +Cpl. Sleath, G. F.            36929  C    K. in A.          9/4/18
     Pte. Slater, D.              202673  A    W.               31/7/17
     Pte. Slater, T.              201631  D    W.                9/9/16
    +Sgt. Smith, J. J.              1075  C    K. in A.         15/6/15
     Pte. Smith, J.               200290  D    W.               15/6/15
     Sgt. Smart, J. E.            200333  B    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Smalley, C.                221  D    W.         N.T.  15/6/15
    +Lieut. Smith, W.                --   -    K. in A.         15/6/15
     Pte. Smith, J.               200290  D    W.              22/12/15
     Pte. Smith, H.               201713  B    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Smith, R.               200873  C    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Smith, W.               242271  D    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Smith, J.                 1474  D    W.                8/8/16
    +Cpl. Smith, J.               200072  D    W.               15/6/15
                                               K. in A.          8/8/16
     Pte. Smith, W.                 4925  B    W.               26/9/16
     Pte. Smith, E.               201780  B    W.                7/6/17
     Pte. Smith, G.               202629  C    W.               31/7/17
     Pte. Smethurst, J. R.         35868  A    W.         N.T.  31/7/17
     Pte. Smith, G. F.             30361  A    W.                2/6/18
     Pte. Smethurst, R            202054  A    W.         N.T.   9/7/18
     Cpl. Smith, H.               235036  B    W.               16/8/18
    +Pte. Smith, J.                42019  D    K. in A.         11/9/18
    +2nd Lieut. Smith, W. B.         --   -    K. in A.         14/9/18
     Pte. Smith, A.                30977  B    W.               30/9/18
     Lance-Sgt. Smith, W.         202724  B    W.              30/11/17
     Pte. Smith, H.                31577  B    W.                9/4/18
     Pte. Smith, J.               265998  B    W.                9/4/18
     Pte. Smith, A.               243755  D    W.                9/4/18
    +Pte. Smith, D. H.             38097  A    K. in A.          9/4/18
     Pte. Smith, W.                29195  D    W.                2/5/18
    +Lance-Cpl. Smith, S.         242836  A    Missing
                                               (Pres’d D.)      14/5/18
     Pte. Smith, A.               235017  C    W.               31/7/17
    +Pte. Smith, W.               201048  C    K. in A.         31/7/17
     2nd Lieut. Smith, A. P.         --   -    W.               20/9/17
     Pte. Smith, H.                37243  C    W.               20/9/17
    +Pte. Smith, E.               201780  B    K. in A.         20/9/17
     Pte. Smith, S. F.             31951  A    W.               20/9/17
    +Pte. Smart, T.                31980  C    K. in A.        30/10/17
     Lance-Cpl. Smith, T.           8584  C    W.              18/11/17
    +Pte. Smith, R.               200917  A    K. in A.        13/10/18
     Lance-Cpl. Smith, A.         243755  D    W.               20/6/18
     Pte. Smith, A.               235017  A    W.              30/11/17
     Pte. Snape, W.                 2965  C    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Snelgrove, J. C.           248  C    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Smithson, E. W.           5019  B    W.                9/9/16
    +Pte. Snowling, G.              9934  C    K. in A.        18/11/17
     Pte. Southworth, J.            2270  B    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Southworth, J.             160  D    W.               15/6/15
                                                             and 1/4/16
     Pte. Sowerby, W. C.          200329  C    R.P. of W.       15/6/15
    +Pte. Southworth, J.            2874  B    K. in A.         15/6/15
     Pte. Southworth, D.            4920  B    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Southworth, A. M.         4499  B    W.                9/9/16
     Pte. Southworth, D.          202653  B    W.               31/7/17
     Lance-Cpl. Southworth, D.    202653  A    W.              18/11/17
    +Pte. Southworth, W.          202542  A    K. in A.          5/8/17
     Pte. Southam, J.              29182  C    W.               13/4/18
                                          B    W.               16/8/18
     Pte. Southworth, C.          201420  A    W.               31/7/17
     Pte. Somers, J.               37589  D    W.              18/11/17
     Lance-Cpl. Springate, H.        131  D    W.               15/6/15
    +Pte. Spencer, R.               2902  B    K. in A.         15/6/15
     Pte. Spivey, F.                1402  D    W.                9/9/16
     Pte. Speakman, W. J.          30664  D    W.                4/9/18
     Pte. Speet, J. W.             30637  B    W.                5/9/18
     Cpl. Spensen, R.             202899  D    W.              30/11/17
     Pte. Spencer, J.             202761  D    W.               31/7/17
     Pte. Squires, B. D.            1978  B    W.               27/3/16
     Pte. Squires, A.               1492  D    W.                8/8/16
    +Pte. Street, R.                2672  B    K. in A.         15/6/15
     Pte. Stanton, J.               2979  A    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Stephenson, V.             119  B    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Stanton, P.               2924  A    W.               15/6/15
    +Lance-Cpl. Stones, R.          1643  B    K. in A.         15/6/15
     Pte. Stark, A. M.              3100  B    R.P. of W.       16/6/15
     Pte. Starling, T.            240625  C    W.                1/8/16
    +Pte. Stevenson, R.             2554  -    Died            25/10/16
    +Cpl. Stephenson, L.            3151  -    K. in A.         28/6/16
     Pte. Stott, E.               202086  D    W.                3/8/16
    +Pte. Shanley, H.               5007  B    W.                8/8/16
                                               D. of W.         13/8/16
     Lieut. Strong, H. W.            --   -    W.                9/9/16
     Lance-Cpl. Strettle, W.        2570  A    W.                9/9/16
     Pte. Stubbs, F.              202775  D    W.                9/9/16
    +Pte. Strickland, T. A.         3053  B    K. in A.          9/9/16
     Pte. Steam, D.               235015  A    W.               29/5/17
     Pte. Stringer, A.            202088  B    W.                8/6/17
    +Sgt. Stephenson, V.          200052  C    K. in A.         18/7/17
    +Pte. Stephan, W. H.           36893  A    K. in A.         18/7/17
     Pte. Stambridge, A.           10631  D    W.               16/8/18
     Lance-Cpl. Stafford, J.       19564  A    W.               16/8/18
     Lance-Cpl Stewart, T.        203840  D    W.               15/8/18
    +Lance-Cpl. Stanford, H.       25775  A    K. in A.        30/11/17
     Lance-Cpl. Stamper, J.        28083  A    W.              30/11/17
     Lance-Cpl. Stubbs, F.        202775  D    W.              30/11/17
     Lance-Cpl. Stewart, T.       283040  D    W.         N.T.  25/4/18
                                                            and 15/8/15
    +Sgt. Stansfield, A.          202767  D    K. in A.         31/7/17
    +Pte. Stearne, D.             235015  A    K. in A.         20/9/17
     Pte. Stoddart, T.             30978  B    W.               30/9/18
    +Cpl. Stratton, S.              6333  -    K. in A.         20/9/17
     Pte. Stroud, W. G.            40552  A    W.              19/10/18
     Lance-Cpl. Stafford, J.       19564  A    W.               26/5/18
     Pte. Sumner, J.                2650  B    W.         N.T.  31/7/16
     Pte. Sumner, R.                2600  B    W.         N.T.   1/8/16
    +Pte. Sutcliffe, J.             6148  C    D. of W.         9/9/16;
                                                                16/9/16
     Pte. Sumner, W.               32001  A    W.                3/5/17
    +Pte. Sutton, R.              200718  A    K. in A.         31/7/17
     Pte. Sumner, J.              200848  A    W.                9/8/18
     Pte. Sumner, W.              203638  C    W.    N.T.        1/5/18
     Pte. Sumner, T.              201017  B    R.P. of W.       31/7/17
    +Pte. Swindlehurst, J.          4643  A    K. in A.         28/9/16
     Pte. Swindells, J.           235041  B    W.               31/7/17
    +Pte. Swift, G. T.            202667  A    K. in A.         31/7/17
     Lance-Cpl. Swingler, E.      243201  B    W.                3/6/18
     Pte. Swift, J.                32870  D    R.P. of W.       17/2/18
     Pte. Swaine, A.                9014  B    W.              18/11/17
     Pte. Swann, D.               244630  D    W.               30/9/18
     Pte. Syddal, A.              235165  B    W.               16/7/17
                                                           and 30/11/17
     Pte. Sykes, T.                37600  B    W.              30/11/17
    +Pte. Singleton, R.            32832  -    K. in A.         31/7/17
    +Pte. Swindlehurst, H.        202534  -    K. in A.         20/9/17


    +Lance-Cpl. Tattersall, W.       776  D    K. in A.          1/4/16
    +Pte. Taylor, J.                2056  D    W.               15/6/15
                                               K. in A.          8/7/18
     Pte. Taylor, A.                 283  C    W.               15/6/15
    +Pte. Taylor, J. W.             2230  A    K. in A.         15/6/15
    +Pte. Tattersall, W.            3490  C    K. in A.         28/6/16
     Pte. Taylor, R. A.             4513  A    W.               31/7/16
     Pte. Taylor, J.                4564  C    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Taylor, J. W.             3306  C    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Taylor, J.                3541  D    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Tarbett, J. W.            4452  C    W.         N.T.   9/9/16
     Pte. Taylor, J.              200972  C    W.                9/9/16
    +Pte. Taylor, W.                4600  C    K. in A.          9/9/16
     Pte. Taylor, T.                3538  D    W.                9/9/16
     Pte. Tatler, W.                4991  B    W.                9/9/16
     Pte. Taylor, W.               15055  B    W.               14/7/17
    +Pte. Taylor, T.               31905  A    K. in A.         31/7/17
     Lance-Cpl. Taylor, T.        202597  B    W.               31/7/17
     2nd Lieut. Tautz, R. H.         --   -    W.               20/9/17
    +Pte. Taylor, T.              201710  D    K. in A.         20/9/17
    +Pte. Taylor, J. E.           235016  A    K. in A.         17/9/17
     Pte. Taysom, J.              291086  C    W.              18/11/17
     Pte. Taylor, T.              203544  C    R.P. of W.      18/11/17
    +Pte. Taylor, J. E.           200495  D    K. in A.         12/4/18
     Pte. Taylor, G. C.            29197  D    W.                9/4/18
     2nd Lieut. Taylor, W. G. E.     --   -    W.                1/6/18
     Pte. Tabor, J. H.            202501  B    W.                2/6/18
     Pte Taylor, H. W.             32290  C    W.                3/6/18
    +Cpl. Tancock, E. J.           13601  D    D. of W.        18/6/18;
                                                                22/6/18
    +Pte. Taylor, J.              200495  D    K. in A.          7/7/18
     Pte. Tarte, W.                36180  D    W.               16/8/18
     Pte. Tabor, J.               202501  B    W.                4/9/18
     Pte. Talbot, R.               30938  D    W.                4/9/18
     Sgt. Taylor, J. W.           201044  C    W.                4/9/18
     2nd Lieut. Taylor, W. G. E.     --   -    Missing         13/10/18
     2nd Lieut. Taylor, J. T.        --   -    W.              16/10/18
     Pte. Taylor, J.               30940  C    W.              23/10/18
     Pte. Taylor, H.               37626  C    W.                9/4/18
    +Pte. Tennant, W.               6204  B    Missing
                                               (Pres’d K.)      26/9/16
    +Pte. Tebay, T.                16062  A    W.               10/4/18
                                               K. in A.         14/5/18
     2nd Lieut. Tennant, J.          --   -    W.                3/9/18
     Pte. Tew, A.                  29398  B    W.              23/10/18
     Pte. Thompson, A.              1637  C    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Thorpe, A.                2545  A    W.               15/6/15
    +Pte. Thorpe, A.              200614  A    K. in A.          9/4/18
     Pte. Thomason, J. S.            260  C    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Thistleton, G.             338  A    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Thornley, H.              4926  B    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Threlfall, W.             3846  D    W.                8/8/16
     Sgt. Thornber, A.              2316  D    W.                9/9/16
    +Pte. Thexton, S.             201041  D    K. in A.          9/9/16
     Pte. Thomason, J. E.          21798  C    W.               24/5/17
    +Sgt. Thompson, J.            201350  A    K. in A.          3/6/17
     Pte. Thistleton, T.          200352  B    W.               10/6/17
     Pte. Thompson, A.            290739  C    R.P. of W.      18/11/17
    +Pte. Threlfall, E.            32961  C    K. in A.        18/11/17
    +Pte. Thomas, J.              202697  D    D. of W.         9/4/18;
                                                                25/4/18
    +Sgt. Thompson, J.            201197  D    W.                9/4/18
     Sgt. Threadgould, W.         243878  A    W.               14/5/18
     Pte. Thornton, F. J.          38221  A    W.               21/5/18
                                                             and 7/7/18
     Lance-Cpl. Thompson, W.      201353  D    W.               23/5/18
     Pte. Thomas, E.               29425  A    W.               29/5/18
     Pte. Thompson, C. H.          29424  D    W.               16/6/18
     2nd Lieut. Thomas, F.           --   -    W.               11/9/18
     Pte. Thornycroft, A.          30640  B    W.               1/10/18
     Pte. Thornley, E.             23223  A    W.              17/10/18
    +Cpl. Thomas, A. S.            29202  C    K. in A.          9/4/18
     Pte. Timbrell, H.              2304  A    W.               30/5/15
                                                             and 9/9/16
     Pte. Tipping, E.               2884  B    W.               15/6/15
     Lance-Sgt. Tickle, H.           139  B    W.                1/1/16
     Pte. Titterington, J.          3873  A    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Tinsley, T.               3057  C    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Timbrell, H.              2304  A    W.                9/9/16
     Pte. Tilsley, W.             202926  C    W.               20/9/17
     Pte. Tipping, F.              29203  A    W.                9/4/18
     Pte. Tinsley, J. A.           30661  C    W.               17/8/18
     Lance-Cpl. Tootle, E.          1185  D    W.               15/6/15
     Cpl. Tomlinson, J. W.          1997  B    W.               15/6/15
                                                            and 18/9/15
     Pte. Towers, W.                2673  A    W.               16/6/15
     Pte. Tootell, J.                149  D    W.                5/9/15
    +Pte. Tomlinson, A.               76  B    K. in A.         15/6/15
    +Pte. Tootell, J.               2011  D    K. in A.          8/8/16
     Pte. Tootell, J.               3240  D    W.                8/8/16
    +Pte. Todd, R.                  4965  B    K. in A.          9/9/16
     Pte. Tomlinson, F. J.         31771  A    W.                6/5/17
     Pte. Tonge, H.               202998  B    R.P. of W.       31/7/17
     Pte. Todd, F.                201069  D    W.               20/9/17
     Lance-Cpl. Tootell, J.       200469  D    W.               20/9/17
     Pte. Todhunter, J. L.        244867  A    W.               20/9/17
     Pte. Todd, P. E.              26117  C    W.              18/11/17
     Pte. Todd, W.                203248  A    W.               14/5/18
     Pte. Todd, G. E.              30979  B    W.              13/10/18
    +Pte. Tomlinson, A.           235044  A    K. in A.         31/7/17
     Cpl. Travis, J.                1366  D    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Tracey, J.              201564  C    R.P. of W.       31/7/17
    +Pte. Trafford, H. B.         203067  C    K. in A.         31/7/17
    +Pte. Turner, F.                2311  A    K. in A.         15/6/15
     Pte. Turner, V.                1919  A    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Turner, W.                4943  B    W.                8/8/16
    +Pte. Turner, W.                4563  C    K. in A.          9/9/16
     Pte. Turner, J.                6207  B    W.                9/9/16
     Pte. Turner, F.                4330  D    W.               29/9/16
     Pte. Turner, E.              235042  B    R.P. of W.       31/7/17
     Pte. Turner, J.              290171  C    W.              18/11/17
    +Pte. Turnbull, T.            202648  A    K. in A.        30/11/17
     Lance-Cpl. Tucker, A. C.      34261  A    W.               29/5/18
    +Pte. Turvey, T.               42023  D    K. in A.          3/6/18
    +Pte. Turner, G.               38808  B    K. in A.        14/10/18
    +Pte. Turnbull, F. M.          42113  B    K. in A.        14/10/18
     Pte. Tyldsley, P.              5032  C    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Tyson, H.                 3387  D    W.         N.T.   8/8/16
     Lance-Cpl. Tyrer, F.           4540  D    W.                8/8/16
     2nd Lieut. Tynell, R. F. L.     --   -    W.               30/3/18
    +Pte. Tyldsley, T.             29200  D    K. in A.         19/4/18
     Pte. Tyers, W.                41297  D    W.               16/6/18
     Pte. Tyler, H.                35474  B    W.               31/7/17
     2nd Lieut. Tyldesley, H.        --   -    W.               31/7/17


     Pte. Underwood, J. P.          2315  A    W.               15/6/15
                                                           and 30/10/15
     Pte. Unsworth, J.              1721  B    W.                9/9/16
     Pte. Unsworth, W.              5078  C    W.         N.T.   9/9/16
    +Pte. Unsworth, J.            200375  B    K. in A.          4/6/17
     Pte. Unsworth, H.             24378  D    W.              13/7/17,
                                                                20/9/17
                                                             and 9/4/18
    +Pte. Unsworth, T.             29426  C    K. in A.          1/5/18
     Pte. Underwood, T. W.         30942  B    W.               14/8/18
     Pte. Urwin, H.                 2866  A    W.                9/9/16
     Pte. Urwin, H.               200779  A    W.               10/4/18
     Pte. Utting, W.                2831  B    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Utting, W.                2880  B    W.               15/6/15


     Pte. Vass, J.                  4288  A    W.               31/7/16
     Pte. Vaughan, D. W.            4655  C    W.                9/9/16
     Pte. Vass, J.                  4298  A    W.                9/9/16
     Pte. Vause, J.                  297  B    W.                9/9/16
     Lance-Cpl. Valentine, G.     202513  C    W.              10/12/16
     Pte. Vause, J.                31937  D    W.               31/7/17
     Pte. Varey, W.                37652  D    W.               12/4/18
     Pte. Vasey, J. W.             26511  B    W.               16/8/18
     Pte. Valentine, G.           202573  B    W.               31/7/17
     Pte. Vause, J.                31937  D    W.                9/4/18
     Pte. Vickers, W.                148  B    W.                9/7/15
     Pte. Vickerman, J.             1296  C    W.               15/6/15
                                                             and 9/9/16
     2nd Lieut. Vipond, T. R.        --   -    W.                9/9/16
     Pte. Vickers, A.             202922  C    W.                9/9/16
     Pte. Vickers, A.             202922  C    W.                8/6/17
     2nd Lieut. Vincent, H. C.       --   -    W.               31/7/17
                                                             and 9/4/18

    +Pte. Waterworth, S.            4440  C    K. in A.          8/8/16
     Pte. Walkden, F.               1621  C    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Waring, T.                2028  D    W.                8/8/16
    +C.S.M. Waring, T.              1720  C    K. in A.          9/9/16
     Pte. Walker, J.              202094  C    W.                9/9/16
    +Pte. Walkden, J. H.          202755  C    K. in A.          9/9/16
     Pte. Wallbank, J.              3021  A    W.         N.T.   9/9/16
     Pte. Watkinson, H.             4045  A    W.         N.T.   9/9/16
     Pte. Ward, C.                  2912  B    W.                9/9/16
     Pte. Walton, J. W.             2828  B    W.               15/5/15
                                                             and 9/9/16
    +Pte. Waddicar, A.            202097  D    K. in A.          4/4/17
     Lance-Cpl. Walton, J. W.     200761  C    W.               13/4/17
     Pte. Ward, A.                 31891  D    R.P. of W.       18/5/17
     Pte. Wainwright, W.          202590  B    W.               14/7/17
     Pte. Wall, J.                 32166  A    W.               18/7/17
     Pte. Watkinson, H.           201366  D    W.               20/9/17
     Pte. Walker, L.               29944  C    W.               20/9/17
     2nd Lieut. Walmsley, J. F.      --   -    W.              22/10/16
    +Lance-Cpl. Walmsley, J.      201521  A    K. in A.         20/9/17
     Pte. Watts, E. J.             31544  C    Missing    N.T. 18/11/17
     Pte. Waring, J.              200175  A    W.         N.T.   9/4/18
     Pte. Walsh, J.                32964  C    W.               14/4/18
     Pte. Walker, F.               29217  A    W.                9/4/18
    +Sgt. Ward, R. H.             200984  B    K. in A.         31/7/17
     Cpl. Walmsley, J.              4992  C    W.               31/7/17
     Pte. Walsh, W.                32085  B    W.               31/7/17
     Pte. Welsh, S.               202921  B    W.               31/7/17
     Pte. Ward, A.                202920  -    W.               31/7/17
     Pte. Walmsley, H.             31987  A    R.P. of W.       31/7/17
    +Pte. Walker, J.                1687  -    Died             6/11/16
    +Pte. Webb, S. G.               9226  -    K. in A.         31/7/17
    +Pte. Wilbraham, T. E.        244686  -    D. of W.         22/9/17
    +Pte. Wilkinson, R.             1149  -    D. of W.         23/8/16
    +Pte. Wilkinson, S.            29223  -    D. of W.         22/5/18
     Pte. Warnes, P.              235040  A    W.               31/7/17
     Pte. Watson, I. W.           202962  A    W.               31/7/17
     Lance-Cpl. Walker, J. E. L.   34330  D    W.               31/7/17
     Pte. Waite, E.                25576  D    W.               31/7/17
     Pte. Waite, J.                37570  A    W.               20/9/17
     Pte. Warren, R.               27561  C    W.               20/9/17
     Pte. Wade, L.                  1023  C    W.               15/6/15
    +Sgt. Waring, T.                1720  B    W.               15/6/15
                                               K. in A.          9/9/16
     Pte. Waring, J.                2053  D    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Waters, E.                2978  A    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Walker, A.                3014  A    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Wainman, A.               3401  D    W.               30/9/15
                                          B    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Walton, T.                4108  D    W.                1/7/16
     Pte. Walsh, A.                 4938  D    W.               25/4/16
     2nd Lieut. Walker, A. S.        --   -    W.               28/6/16
     Pte. Wardley, J.               4932  C    W.               30/6/16
     Lance-Cpl. Wade, R. W.         4069  A    W.               28/6/16
     Pte. Ward, T.                  1975  A    W.               29/6/16
     Pte. Ward, A.                  2787  A    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Walker, J.                4930  B    W.               31/7/16
     Pte. Walsh, J.                 4398  A    W.                3/8/16
     Pte. Walmsley, C.              4167  B    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Watson, A.              376021  A    W.         N.T.  26/4/18
     Pte. Walsh, J.                32495  A    W.               14/5/18
    +Sgt. Walne, W.               200357  A    K. in A.          7/5/18
     Pte. Walmsley, T.             37669  A    W.                2/6/18
     Pte. Warrington, J. S.        41668  D    W.         N.T.   2/6/18
    +Pte. Wallis, F. C.           241358  -    K. in A.          6/5/18
     Pte. Watkinson, H.            36794  D    W.               27/6/18
    +Pte. Watson, M.               29427  D    K. in A.          8/7/18
     Pte. Walker, A.               30476  C    W.               16/8/18
     Pte. Wadd, H.                 40433  B    W.               16/8/16
     Cpl. Warwick, W. A.           15554  B    W.                4/9/18
     Lance-Cpl. Wainwright, W.    202590  B    W.                4/9/18
     Pte. Walmsley, F.             41097  B    W.               14/9/18
     Pte. Wandless, G. E.          30981  B    W.               14/9/18
     Pte. Watts, J. A.            235513  C    W.               24/9/18
     Pte. Ward, T.                343016  A    W.         N.T.  30/9/18
     Pte. Warnes, H.               30980  -    W.               30/9/18
    +2nd Lieut. Walton               --   -    K. in A.        16/11/16
    +Pte. Walton, J.               30983  B    K. in A.         2/10/18
     Pte. Watkinson, A.            25462  A    W.              23/10/18
     Pte. Wafer, P.                22306  A    W.               14/5/18
     Pte. Welley, L.                7526  C    W.         N.T.   8/9/16
     Pte. Webster, P. J.            6297  C    W.                9/9/16
     Pte. Welsh, S.                 6313  C    W.               25/9/16
    +Pte. West, J.                202155  B    K. in A.         15/7/17
    +Pte. Webster, P.             202907  C    K. in A.         21/7/17
    +Pte. Webster, W               36175  A    W.               22/7/17
                                               K. in A.         11/9/18
    +2nd Lieut. Westwood, S. B.      --   -    W.               17/2/18
                                               K. in A.         18/4/18
     Pte. Webb, W.                 35539  A    W.               31/7/17
     Pte. Westhead, F.            203879  B    R.P. of W.       31/7/17
    +Pte. Weatherstone, J.          4470  D    K. in A.          3/8/16
     Pte. Waston, W. A.            29429  -    W.               20/5/18
     2nd Lieut. Wetherill, W. B.     --   -    Missing          17/6/18
     Pte. West, H.                 24664  D    W.               16/8/16
    +Pte. Webster, S.              36175  A    K. in A.         11/9/18
    +Pte. Weaver, A.               24328  B    D. of W.         2/10/18
    +Cpl. West, G.                 28195  A    K. in A.          8/7/18
     Lance-Cpl. Whittle, R. H.      3939  C    W.                8/8/16
     Pte. Whyte, J.                 2870  C    W.                8/8/16
    +Pte. Wharton, J.               3985  B    D. of W.         8/8/16;
                                                                25/9/16
     Pte. Whyte, P.                 3762  C    W.                9/9/16
     Pte. Whelan, G.              202924  C    W.                9/9/16
     Pte. Whinney, C. T.          202785  C    W.                9/9/16
     Pte. Whittaker, H.           202819  A    W.                6/5/17
     Pte. Whitelegg, E.           202552  A    W.                6/5/17
    +Lance-Cpl. Whalley, W.         3211  D    K. in A.          7/6/17
    +Pte. Whiteside, J.           200674  C    K. in A.         18/7/17
     Pte. Whittingham, H.         202657  D    W.               30/7/17
     Pte. Whalley, R.             202170  A    R.P. of W.       31/7/17
     Pte. Wharton, R.              37147  A    W.               20/9/17
     Pte. Whittle, W.             201835  D    W.              30/11/17
     Pte. Whalen, E.              201812  D    W.              30/11/17
    +Pte. Whalley, J.              24140  D    K. in A.          9/4/18
     Pte. Whittaker, G.           203529  C    W.               31/7/17
     Sgt. Whiteside, T.           200001  C    W.               31/7/17
     Pte. Whalley, C.             200619  A    W.               31/7/17
     Pte. Whittle, J.              23759  B    R.P. of W.       31/7/17
     Pte. Whittle, W.             235168  B    Missing    N.T.  31/7/17
     Pte. Whelan, G. E.            36676  C    R.P. of W.       31/7/17
     Pte. Whitley, B.             202677  D    W.               20/9/17
     Lance-Sgt. Whiteside, J.        906  C    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Whittle, A.               1490  D    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Whiteside, J.             2135  B    W.               30/5/15
     Pte. Whalley, C.               2552  A    W.               15/6/15
     Lance-Cpl. Whiteside, T.          2  B    W.               15/6/15
                                                             and 8/8/16
     Pte. Whittaker, W.                7  B    W.               11/8/15
     Pte. Whewill, H.                 80  B    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Whitehead, C.             3827  A    W.                9/7/16
    +Pte. Whittle, W.                415  A    K. in A.         15/6/15
    +Pte. Wharton, A.               2024  A    K. in A.         15/6/15
    +Pte. Whiteside, W.             2632  C    K. in A.         15/6/15
    +Pte. Whalley, G. C.            3192  C    K. in A.         15/6/15
     Pte. Whittaker, F.           242738  C    W.                4/8/16
     Pte. Whiteside, J.             2138  B    W.                5/8/16
     Pte. Whiteside, T.              242  C    W.                5/8/16
     Pte. Whitehead, W. T.         29428  A    W.               14/5/18
     Pte. Whittaker, R.            29220  B    W.               21/5/17
     Pte. Whiteside, J.            15180  B    W.               18/6/18
     Pte. Whitehead, C.            31516  A    W.               20/6/18
    +Pte. White, F. H.             42030  C    D. of W.        25/6/18;
                                                                13/9/18
     Pte. White, F.                10200  B    W.         N.T.  25/6/18
     Pte. Whittaker, J.            25399  D    W.                4/9/18
     Pte. Whitehead, W.           235506  B    W.                5/9/18
     Lance-Cpl. Wharton, S.       201743  D    W.                9/9/18
     Pte. Whittaker, J.            25399  B    W.              22/10/18
     Pte. Whitfield, H.            30987  B    W.              23/10/18
    +Capt. Whitfield, J. L.          --   -    K. in A.         15/6/15
     Lance-Cpl. Wharton, S.       201743  D    W.                9/4/18
     Pte. White, T. H.             27136  C    W.                4/9/18
     Pte. Wilson, J.                1621  C    W.         N.T.   8/8/16
    +Pte. Winrow, R.                7583  D    K. in A.          8/8/16
     Pte. Wilson, J. H.             5442  D    W.                8/8/16
     Capt. Widdows, J. O.            --   -    Shock            10/8/16
     Pte. Wilkin, J.                1002  C    W.                9/9/16
     Pte. Wilson, H.                4453  C    W.                9/9/16
    +Pte. Wilson, J.                4381  C    K. in A.          9/9/16
     Pte. Wilson, A.              201877  C    W.                9/9/16
    +Pte. Williams, D. H.         202918  C    K. in A.          9/9/16
    +Pte. Wilcock, F. N.           13141  -    K. in A.         23/7/16
    +Pte. Williams, J. B.         204811  -    Died at Home    30/12/17
    +Pte. Worden, H.              202424  -    K. in A.          4/4/17
     Pte. Winterbourne, W.          4997  C    W.         N.T.   9/9/16
     Pte. Wilkinson, H.             4447  C    W.         N.T.   9/9/16
    +Sgt. Williamson, M.          200236  A    K. in A.          9/9/16
     Pte. Wignall, W.               3771  A    W.                9/9/16
    +Pte. Wilkinson, R.             3249  C    W.               15/6/15
                                               D. of W.         11/9/16
    +Pte. Winstanley, J.            6113  D    K. in A.         28/9/16
    +Pte. Williams, F.              2963  B    K. in A.         29/9/16
     Lance-Cpl. Wilson, C. H.       6307  C    W.              18/11/16
     Pte. Widdup, J.              202655  D    W.                4/4/17
     Pte. Wilson, H. G.            36177  A    W.                2/6/17
     Pte. Willett, W.              18618  B    W.                4/6/17
     Pte. Wilson, R.              202993  B    W.                5/5/17
    +Pte. Wignall, A.             201752  B    K. in A.          7/6/17
     Pte. Willacy, H. P.          201439  C    W.               15/7/17
                                               R.P. of W.       31/7/17
    +Pte. Wilson, R.              201225  C    K. in A.         21/7/17
     Lance-Cpl. Wilson, C. H.     202916  C    W.               21/7/17
     Pte. Willett, T. H.          202093  D    W.               21/9/17
     Pte. Wills, G. J.             25041  D    W.               20/9/17
     Pte. Williams, C. P.          28261  A    W.              18/11/17
     Pte. Wilson H.                24217  A    W.              18/11/17
    +2nd Lieut. Wilkinson, R. B.     --   -    K. in A.        30/11/17
    +Pte. Willacy, E.             200362  A    K. in A.        30/11/17
     Pte. Winstanley, W.           27807  A    W.              30/11/17
     Pte. Wickham, G. T. W.         2924  A    W.               19/3/18
     Pte. Williams, J.             34314  B    W.                9/4/18
    +Pte. Wilmore, H.              27666  B    K. in A.         25/4/18
    +2nd Lieut. Williams, B. H.      --   -    K. in A.         31/7/17
     Pte. Winstanley, E.          200299  D    W.               31/7/17
     Pte. Wilson, T.              201753  B    W.               31/7/17
     Pte. Wilcock, J.             203629  D    W.               31/7/17
     Pte. Wilkinson, J.           202688  D    W.               31/7/17
     Pte. Winnow, J.               27591  A    W.               17/9/17
    +Pte. Wignall, E.               3155  -    K. in A.         21/5/16
    +Cpl. Williamson, M.            1138  A    W.               15/6/15
                                               K. in A.          9/9/16
     Pte. Wilson, T.                1600  B    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Williamson, P.            1699  A    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Wilding, A.               2740  B    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Wignall, E.               3155  A    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Wilder, F.                  33  B    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Wilson, R.                 255  C    W.               16/6/15
     Pte. Wilkinson, J.           200863  C    W.              29/10/15
     2nd Lieut. Wilson, M.           --   -    W.               23/4/16
    +Pte. Wilson, H.                1965  B    K. in A.         15/6/15
    +Cpl. Windebank, T.             2499  C    K. in A.         15/6/15
     Pte. Wilson, H. S.             4631  C    W.               14/7/16
     Pte. Winrow, G.                4138  A    W.                5/8/16
    +Pte. Willan, G.                4501  A    K. in A.          8/8/16
     Pte. Wilcock, J.               3935  B    W.                8/8/16
    +Pte. Williamson, H.           42024  A    W.               20/5/18
                                               Died            15/11/18
     Pte. Williams, J. D.         242028  A    W.         N.T.   8/6/18
    +Pte. Wilding, J.              23501  D    W.               16/8/16
                                               K. in A.        14/10/18
     Pte. Wilson, H.               24217  A    W.               16/8/16
     Pte. Williams E. B.           30646  D    W.               16/8/16
     Pte. Winterbotton, J. A.      27111  D    W.                4/9/18
     Pte. Williams, F.             26826  D    W.                4/9/18
     Pte. Williamson, W.           30658  A    W.               30/9/18
     Pte. Wilson, H. W.           240713  -    W.               30/9/18
     Pte. Wiles, G.                30988  B    W.               2/10/18
     Pte. Wiles, J.                30643  B    W.              13/10/18
     Pte. Williamson, J.           30985  B    W.              17/10/18
     Pte. Winstanley, R.           23592  B    W.              23/10/18
     Pte. Wilby, G. H.             29069  B    W.              23/10/18
     Pte. Williams, G.             41530  B    W.              23/10/18
     Pte. Williams, R.             32211  A    W.              23/10/18
    +Pte. Wilkinson, A.            25945  A    K. in A.        23/10/18
     Pte. Wiles, J.                30643  D    W.               16/8/18
    +Pte. Wilson, J.              202098  B    K. in A.          8/8/16
    +Pte. Williams, H.             31977  A    K. in A.          2/6/17
     Cpl. Wilkinson, J. S.        202752  D    W.                9/4/18
     Pte. Williams, C. P.          28261  D    W.                9/4/18
    +Pte. Wilkinson, A.            25945  A    K. in A.        23/10/18
    +Pte. Woodruff, W.              3309  D    K. in A.          8/8/16
    +Pte. Woodhouse, E.             3978  D    K. in A.          8/8/16
    +Pte. Worthington, A.           2074  D    K. in A.          8/8/16
     Pte. Wood, E. L.               5095  C    W.         N.T.   8/9/16
    +Pte. Wootton, A.               6312  C    K. in A.          9/9/16
     Pte. Wood, J.                  4309  C    Missing    N.T.   9/9/16
     Pte. Woodward, G.              5197  B    W.         N.T.   9/9/16
     Pte. Worthington, G.         202589  C    W.               18/7/17
     Pte. Woods, J.                32177  B    W.               20/9/17
    +Pte. Wood, F.                 27078  C    K. in A.         20/9/17
    +Pte. Worthington, J. S.      202644  C    K. in A.        18/11/17
     Pte. Worthington, G.         202588  C    W.              18/11/17
     Pte. Worthington, I.          37663  B    W.              30/11/17
     Pte. Woodward, G.            202823  D    W.                9/4/18
     Pte. Woods, J.               201593  B    W.               31/7/17
    +Pte. Worsley, R.             200032  B    D. of W.        31/7/17;
                                                                 8/8/17
    +Pte. Wood, W.                 31518  B    K. in A.         31/7/17
    +Pte. Woodcock, J.             17101  D    K. in A.         31/7/17
    +Pte. Wood, F.                 27078  C    K. in A.         19/9/17
     Pte. Woods, J.                32177  B    W.               20/9/17
    +Pte. Woodward, C. S.            250  B    K. in A.         29/6/16
     C.S.M. Woods, J.                501  D    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Worthington, A.           2072  B    W.               30/5/15
     Pte. Woods, J.                 2586  A    W.               15/6/15
    +Pte. Woodburn, A.              2669  A    W.               15/6/15
                                               D. of W.         3/11/15
     Pte. Worswick, J.              2830  B    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Worthington, F.           2903  B    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Wood, H.                  3082  C    W.               15/6/15
    +Pte. Worsley, R.                 73  B    W.               15/6/15
                                               D. of W.          8/8/17
     Pte. Woods, W. H.               235  C    W.               15/6/15
     Pte. Woods, J.                  241  C    W.               15/6/15
     Lance-Cpl. Woodward, C.         250  B    W.               14/6/15
    +Pte. Woodburn, A.              2669  A    D. of W.         8/11/15
    +Sgt. Woods, R.                   58  B    K. in A.         15/6/15
     Pte. Worswick, J.              4933  A    W.               31/7/16
     Pte. Woods, T.                 4578  C    W.                3/8/16
    +Pte. Worsley, F.               5001  B    K. in A.          8/8/16
     Pte. Wood, H.                 38971  C    W.         N.T.  28/7/18
     Pte. Wood, E. C.              41682  C    W.               12/5/18
     Pte. Woodruff, F.             29204  B    W.               11/5/18
     Lance-Cpl. Woods, D.         290208  A    W.               14/5/18
     Pte. Woodward, G.             28250  B    W.                2/6/18
    +Pte. Wood, H. E.              41085  D    K. in A.          2/6/18
    +Pte. Woodburn, W.            232037  A    K. in A.   N.T. 23/10/18
    +Sgt. Wrigley, W. H.            6201  A    K. in A.          9/9/16
     Pte. Wragg, W. H.              4912  C    W.         N.T.   9/9/16
     Pte. Wrench, J.               11577  D    W.                2/7/17
     Pte. Wright, T. H.           290588  D    W.              30/11/17
     Pte. Wragg, W. H.            202915  C    W.               17/2/18
     Pte. Wright, T.              202588  D    W.               13/4/18
     Pte. Wright, M. C.             2643  A    W.               15/6/15
    +Pte. Worden, H.              202424  -    K. in A.          4/4/17
     Pte. Wright, J.               20638  B    W.               25/3/16
    +Pte. Wright, W.                4393  A    K. in A.          8/8/16
     Pte. Wright, J.                9216  B    W.               18/6/18
    +Pte. Winn, M.                  3551  D    Died             4/10/16
     Cpl. Wyre, P.                202099  A    W.               16/8/18
    +Pte. Winrow, J.               27591  -    D. of W.         18/9/17


     Pte. Yates, H.               201202  D    W.               16/8/16
     Pte. Yates, J.               241577  D    W.               15/8/18
    +Pte. Yates, J.               200888  -    K. in A.          9/4/18
     Pte. Yates, G.                 2092  D    W.               15/6/15
    +Pte. Yates, E.                 1774  B    K. in A.         15/6/15
     Pte. Yates, F.                 4774  C    W.         N.T.   9/9/16
     Pte. Yates, H.                 3561  D    W.               28/9/16
     Sgt. Yates, R. T.            200090  D    R.P. of W.       31/7/16
     Pte. Yates, W.                24583  D    W.              30/11/17
     Pte. Yates, J. R.             29224  -    W.                9/4/18
     Pte. Yates, F.               202913  C    W.               21/7/17
    +Pte. Yates, J.               201543  D    K. in A.         21/7/18
     Pte. Young, W. A.             29399  B    W.               30/9/18
     Pte. Young, W.               202676  B    W.               31/7/16
    +Pte. Younger, W.              30986  B    K. in A.        23/10/18
    +Pte. Yull, G. A.               3572  B    K. in A.          8/8/16


FOOTNOTES:

[A] Changed to “Lancashire” in 1781 when they were sent to that County
to recruit.

[B] According to tradition.

[C] C.Q.M.S. Lester and Private Cowburn (S. B.) brought him in to L 8.

[D] Captain Caldwell, M.O., was specially mentioned for attending to
243 wounded and getting them clear.

[E] Fifty-one men actually answered the roll, the rest being accounted
for.

[F] On the 26th, R.S.M. Farnworth, who for a long time had been
suffering great pain in his limbs, was sent to hospital. He was
eventually discharged unfit for further service. A man of arresting
personality, steeped in Army tradition, and the possessor of a biting
tongue, his influence in the Battalion was great and lasting.

[G] Captain Baker--formerly Quartermaster--had volunteered for a
combatant Commission when we were short of Officers after the Somme
Battles--and was given command of B Company which he held until killed
in September, 1917. The high qualities which had made him an ideal
Quartermaster, made him equally successful as a Company Commander.

[H] From “The Story of the 55th Division,” by the Rev. J. O. COOP.
“Liverpool Daily Post.”

[I] A post normally consisted of an N.C.O. and 6 men.

[J] Two years afterwards his parents received this pocket book. The
last entries are as follow:--

“Remainder of section to follow L/C. Price. Tell Sergeant.”

“You have done damn well, but you aren’t finished yet! Read this to
him.”

“Bomb the Boche out. See that gap in the parapet? I want to get the
whole section there.”

“Can we get a message back to Capt. Swaine? I suggest let one man take
Farnworth back and also message. Tell O.C. A Co....”

So it ends.


Transcriber’s Note:

1. Superscripts are represented using the caret character, e.g. D^r.

2. Obvious spelling, punctuation and printer’s errors have been silently
   corrected.

3. Where appropriate, hyphenated or non-hyphenated words have been kept
   as in the original.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WAR HISTORY OF THE 1ST/4TH
BATTALION, THE LOYAL NORTH LANCASHIRE REGIMENT ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
